  size of compared with the Earth, 308;
  and with other planets, 119;
  subject to another attraction besides the Sun, 314

Ursa major (_see_ Great Bear)


V

Variable Stars, 429

Vega, 414, 423, 424, 479;
  Struve's measurement of, 442

Velocity, of light, 261, 262, 265;
  of light, laws dependent upon, 511;
  of planets, 140-143, 146, 237;
  of stars, values of, 483-4

Venus, ancient study of, 6;
  aspects of, 171;
  atmosphere of, 189;
  brilliancy of, 168;
  density of, 558;
  diameter of, 191, 558;
  distance of, from the Sun, 191, 558;
  habitability of, 173;
  movement of, 168;
  neighbour to the Earth, 109;
  orbit of, 114, 135;
  orbit form of, 139, 191;
  periodic time of, 558;
  a planet or "wanderer," 111;
  rotation of, 191;
  shape of, 169;
  size of, compared with other planets, 116, 169;
  surface of, 171;
  transit of, 152, 176-190;
  transit, importance of, 173;
  transit predicted by Kepler, 163;
  velocity and periodic time of, 142, 143, 191;
  view of the ancients about, 157

Vesta, 233, 238

Victoria, 242

Vienna telescope, 14-16

Virgo, 423

Vogel and Algol, 485;
  and Spica, 486, 487;
  and the spectra of the stars, 479, 483

Volcanic origin of meteorites, 400;
  outbreaks on the Earth, 197

Von Asten and Encke's comet, 349, 350;
  and the distance of the Sun, 351;
  and the weight of Mercury, 166

Vortex rings, 469

Vulcan, 152, 153;
  and the Sun, 3


W

Wargentin, 90

Watson, Professor, and Mercury, 154

Watson, Sir William, friendship with Herschel, 302

Wave-lengths, 60

Weather, not affected by the Moon, 82

Wilson, Mr. W.E., and the nebula in Orion, 469

Witt, Herr G., and Eros, 236

Wold Cottage meteorite, the, 392

Wright, Thomas, and the Milky Way, 474


Y

"Year of Stars," the, 377

Yerkes Observatory, Chicago, 16

Young, Professor, account of a marvellous Sun-prominence, 42;
  and Sun-spots, 38;
  observations on magnetic storms, 39


Z

Zeeman, Dr., and spectral lines, 491

Zinc in the Sun, 50

Zodiac, the, 5

Zodiacal light, 67

Zone of minor planets, 234


PRINTED BY CASSELL & COMPANY, LIMITED, LA BELLE SAUVAGE, LONDON, E.C.


FOOTNOTES:

[1] It may, however, be remarked that a star is never _seen_ to set, as,
owing to our atmosphere, it ceases to be visible before it reaches the
horizon.

[2] "Popular Astronomy," p. 66.

[3] _Limb_ is the word used by astronomers to denote the _edge_ or
circumference of the apparent disc of a heavenly body.

[4] "The Sun," p. 119.

[5] It has been frequently stated that the outburst in 1859, witnessed
by Carrington and Hodgson, was immediately followed by an unusually
intense magnetic storm, but the records at Kew and Greenwich show that
the magnetic disturbances on that day were of a very trivial character.

[6] Some ungainly critic has observed that the poet himself seems to
have felt a doubt on the matter, because he has supplemented the dubious
moonbeams by the "lantern dimly burning." The more generous, if somewhat
a sanguine remark has been also made, that "the time will come when the
evidence of this poem will prevail over any astronomical calculations."

[7] This sketch has been copied by permission from the very beautiful
view in Messrs. Nasmyth and Carpenter's book, of which it forms Plate
XI. So have also the other illustrations of lunar scenery in Plates
VIII., IX. The photographs were obtained by Mr. Nasmyth from models
carefully constructed from his drawings to illustrate the features on
the moon. During the last twenty years photography has completely
superseded drawing by eye in the delineation of lunar objects. Long
series of magnificent photographs of lunar scenery have been published
by the Paris and Lick Observatories.

[8] At the British Association's meeting at Cardiff in 1892, Prof.
Copeland exhibited a model of the moon, on which the appearance of the
streaks near full moon was perfectly shown by means of small spheres of
transparent glass attached to the surface.

[9] The duration of an occultation, or, in other words, the length of
time during which the moon hides the star, would be slightly shorter
than the computed time, if the moon had an atmosphere capable of
sensibly refracting the light from the star. But, so far, our
observations do not indicate this with certainty.

[10] I owe my knowledge of this subject to Dr. G. Johnstone Stoney,
F.R.S. There has been some controversy as to who originated the
ingenious and instructive doctrine here sketched.

[11] The space described by a falling body is proportional to the
product of the force and the square of the time. The force varies
inversely as the square of the distance from the earth, so that the
space will vary as the square of the time, and inversely as the square
of the distance. If, therefore, the distance be increased sixty-fold,
the time must also be increased sixty-fold, if the space fallen through
is to remain the same.

[12] See Newcomb's "Popular Astronomy," p. 78.

[13] Recent investigation by Newcomb on the motion of Mercury have led
to the result that the hypothesis of a planet or a ring of very small
planets between the orbit of Mercury and the sun cannot account for the
difference between theory and observation in the movements of Mercury.
Harzer has come to the same result, and has shown that the disturbing
element may possibly be the material of the Solar Corona.

[14] "The Sun: its Planets, and their Satellites." London: 1882 (page
147).

[15] James Gregory, in a book on optics written in 1667, had already
suggested the use of the transit of Venus for this purpose.

[16] _See_ "Astronomy and Astrophysics," No. 128.

[17] _See_ "Astronomy and Astrophysics," No. 128.

[18] This is the curved marking which on Plate XVIII. appears in
longitude 290 deg. and north of (that is, below) the equator. Here, as in
all astronomical drawings, north is at the foot and south at the top.
_See_ above, p. 82 (Chapter III.).

[19] Now Director of the Lick Observatory.

[20] The heliometer is a telescope with its object-glass cut in half
along a diameter. One or both of these halves is movable transversely by
a screw. Each half gives a complete image of the object. The measures
are effected by observing how many turns of the screw convey the image
of the star formed by one half of the object-glass to coincide with the
image of the planet formed by the other.

[21] See "Astronomy and Astrophysics," No. 109.

[22] It is only right to add that some observers believe that, in
exceptional circumstances, points of Jupiter have shown some slight
degree of intrinsic light.

[23] Professor Pickering, of Cambridge, Mass., has, however, effected
the important improvement of measuring the decline of light of the
satellite undergoing eclipse by the photometer. Much additional
precision may be anticipated in the results of such observations.

[24] "Newcomb's Popular Astronomy," p. 336.

[25] _See_ Grant, "History of Physical Astronomy," page 255.

[26] Now Director of the Lick Observatory.

[27] We are here neglecting the orbital motion of Saturn, by which the
whole system is moved towards or from the earth, but as this motion is
common to the ball and the ring, it will not disturb the relative
positions of the three spectra.

[28] According to Prof. Barnard's recent measures, the diameter of Titan
is 2,700 miles. This is the satellite discovered by Huyghens; it is the
sixth in order from the planet.

[29] Extract from "Three Cities of Russia," by C. Piazzi Smyth, vol.
ii., p. 164: "In the year 1796. It then chanced that George III., of
Great Britain, was pleased to send as a present to the Empress Catharine
of Russia a ten-foot reflecting telescope constructed by Sir William
Herschel. Her Majesty immediately desired to try its powers, and
Roumovsky was sent for from the Academy to repair to Tsarskoe-Selo,
where the Court was at the time residing. The telescope was accordingly
unpacked, and for eight long consecutive evenings the Empress employed
herself ardently in observing the moon, planets, and stars; and more
than this, in inquiring into the state of astronomy in her dominions.
Then it was that Roumovsky set before the Imperial view the Academy's
idea of removing their observatory, detailing the necessity for, and the
advantages of, such a proceeding. Graciously did the 'Semiramis of the
North,' the 'Polar Star,' enter into all these particulars, and warmly
approve of the project; but death closed her career within a few weeks
after, and prevented her execution of the design."

[30] _See_ Professor Holden's "Sir William Herschel, his Life and
Works."

[31] Arago says that "Lemonnier's records were the image of chaos."
Bouvard showed to Arago one of the observations of Uranus which was
written on a paper bag that in its time had contained hair-powder.

[32] The first comet of 1884 also suddenly increased in brightness,
while a distinct disc, which hitherto had formed the nucleus, became
transformed into a fine point of light.

[33] The three numbers 12, 1, and 1/4 are nearly inversely proportional
to the atomic weights of hydrogen, hydrocarbon gas, and iron vapour, and
it is for this reason that Bredichin suggested the above-mentioned
composition of the various types of tail. Spectroscopic evidence of the
presence of hydrogen is yet wanting.

[34] This illustration, as well as the figure of the path of the
meteors, has been derived from Dr. G.J. Stoney's interesting lecture on
"The Story of the November Meteors," at the Royal Institution, in 1879.

[35] On the 27th November, 1885, a piece of meteoric iron fell at
Mazapil, in Mexico, during the shower of Andromedes, but whether it
formed part of the swarm is not known. It is, however, to be noticed
that meteorites are said to have fallen on several other occasions at
the end of November.

[36] Hooke had noticed, in 1664, that the star Gamma Arietis was double.

[37] Perhaps if we could view the stars without the intervention of the
atmosphere, blue stars would be more common. The absorption of the
atmosphere specially affects the greenish and bluish colours. Professor
Langley gives us good reason for believing that the sun itself would be
blue if it were not for the effect of the air.

[38] The declination of a star is the arc drawn from the star to the
equator at right angles to the latter.

[39] The distance of 61 Cygni has, however, again been investigated by
Professor Asaph Hall, of Washington, who has obtained a result
considerably less than had been previously supposed; on the other hand,
Professor Pritchard's photographic researches are in confirmation of
Struve's and those obtained at Dunsink.

[40] I am indebted for this drawing to the kindness of Messrs. De la
Rue.

[41] _See_ Chapter XIX., on the mass of Sirius and his satellite.

[42] As the earth carries on the telescope at the rate of 18 miles a
second, and as light moves with the velocity of 180,000 miles a second
very nearly, it follows that the velocity of the telescope is about one
ten-thousandth part of that of light. While the light moves down the
tube 20 feet long, the telescope will therefore have moved the
ten-thousandth part of 20 feet--_i.e._, the fortieth of an inch.

[43] _See_ Newcomb's "Popular Astronomy," p. 508, where the discovery of
this law is attributed to Mr. J. Homer Lane, of Washington. The
contraction theory is due to Helmholtz.

[44] The theory of Tidal Evolution sketched in this chapter is mainly
due to the researches of Professor G.H. Darwin, F.R.S.

[45] The hour varies with the locality: it would be 11.49 at Calais; at
Liverpool, 11.23; at Swansea Bay, 5.56, etc.

[46] Having decided upon the units of mass, of angle, and of distance
which we intend to use for measuring these quantities, then any mass, or
angle, or distance is expressed by a certain definite number. Thus if we
take the mass of the earth as the unit of mass, the angle through which
it moves in a second as the unit of angle, and its distance from the sun
as the unit of distance, we shall find that the similar quantities for
Jupiter are expressed by the numbers 316, 0.0843, and 5.2 respectively.
Hence its orbital moment of momentum is 316 x 0.0843 x (5.2) squared.






End of Project Gutenberg's The Story of the Heavens, by Robert Stawell Ball

