"If we had only fallen in love with each other, Maril, we'd be a team!
Too bad! These are a wedding present you'll do well to hide."

She put her hands in his.

"I like you almost as much as I like Murgatroyd! Yes! Korvan will
never know, and he'll be a great man." Then she added defensively,
"But I don't think he'll only discover things from hints I drop him.
He'll make wonderful discoveries."

"Of which," said Calhoun, "the most remarkable is you. Good luck,
Maril!"

She went away smiling. But she wiped her eyes when she was out of the
ship.

Presently the Med Ship lifted. Calhoun aimed it for the next planet on
the list of those he was to visit. After this one more he'd return to
sector headquarters with a biting report to make on the way things had
been handled before him.

"Overdrive coming, Murgatroyd!"

Then the stars went out and there was silence, and privacy, and a
faint, faint, almost unbearable series of background sounds which kept
the Med Ship from being totally unendurable.

Long, long days later the ship broke out of overdrive and Calhoun
guided it to a round and sunlit world. In due time he thumbed the
communicator button.

"Calling ground," he said crisply. "Calling ground! Med Ship
_Aesclipus Twenty_ reporting arrival and asking coordinates for
landing. Purpose of landing is planetary health inspection. Our mass
is fifty standard tons."

There was a pause while the beamed message went many, many thousands
of miles. Then the speaker said, "_Aesclipus Twenty_, repeat your
identification!"

Calhoun repeated it patiently. Murgatroyd watched with bright eyes.
Perhaps he hoped to be allowed to have another long conversation with
somebody by communicator.

"You are warned," said the communicator sternly, "that any deceit or
deception about your identity or purpose in landing will be severely
punished. We take few chances, here! If you wish to land
notwithstanding this warning--"

"I'm coming in," said Calhoun. "Give me the coordinates."

He wrote them down. His expression was slightly pained. The Med Ship
drove on, in solar system drive. Murgatroyd said, "_Chee-chee? Chee?_"

Calhoun sighed.

"That's right, Murgatroyd! Here we go again!"

       *       *       *       *       *




FEAR RIDES THE ROCKETS


The Interstellar Medical Service was just about the only remaining
galactic organization that every one of the hundreds of inhabited
planets respected. So when their service broke down in Star Sector
Twelve, it created a very dangerous situation.

When Calhoun took his Med ship out of overdrive near that sector's
planet Weald, he was vaguely aware of the risks. But the crisis came
home to him with a crash the moment he radioed in for landing
coordinates.

"Contamination! Full mobilization! Red alert! Death to blueskins!"
Such were the nature of his greetings.

And it began to look like a case of the cosmic jitters that only the
most drastic of orbital surgery could cure.

Murray Leinster, whose real name is Will F. Jenkins, has been
entertaining the public with his exciting fiction for several decades.
Called the dean of modern science-fiction, he was writing these
amazing super-science adventures back in the early twenties before
there ever was such a thing as an all-fantasy magazine. His short
stories, novelettes, and serial novels have appeared in most of the
major American magazines, both slick and pulp, and many have been
reprinted all over the world. He has made a distinguished name for
himself (or rather two names) in the fields of adventure, historical,
western, sea, and suspense stories.

Ace Books has still available the following Murray Leinster novels:
CITY ON THE MOON (D-277), THE PIRATES OF ZAN and THE MUTANT WEAPON
(D-403), and THE FORGOTTEN PLANET (D-528).

       *       *       *       *       *

Here's a quick checklist of recent releases of
ACE SCIENCE-FICTION BOOKS

35c

D-498 GALACTIC DERELICT by Andre Norton

D-504 MASTER OF THE WORLD by Jules Verne

D-507 MEETING AT INFINITY by John Brunner
      _and_ BEYOND THE SILVER SKY by Kenneth Bulmer

D-508 MORE MACABRE Edited by Donald A. Wollheim

D-509 THE BEAST MASTER by Andre Norton
      _and_ STAR HUNTER by Andre Norton

D-516 THE SWORDSMAN OF MARS
      by Otis Adelbert Kline

D-517 BRING BACK YESTERDAY by A. Bertram Chandler
      _and_ THE TROUBLE WITH TYCHO by Clifford Simak

40c

F-104 MAYDAY ORBIT by Poul Anderson
      _and_ NO MAN'S WORLD by Kenneth Bulmer

F-105 THE BEST FROM FANTASY AND SCIENCE FICTION
      Fifth Series. Edited by Anthony Boucher.

F-108 THE SUN SABOTEURS by Damon Knight
      _and_ THE LIGHT OF LILITH by G. McDonald Wallis

F-109 STORM OVER WARLOCK by Andre Norton

F-113 REBELS OF THE RED PLANET by Charles Fontenay
      _and_ 200 YEARS TO CHRISTMAS by J. T. McIntosh

If you are missing any of these, they can be obtained directly from
the publisher by sending the indicated sum, plus 5c handling fee, to
Ace Books, Inc. (Sales Dept.), 23 West 47th St., New York 36, N. Y.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of This World Is Taboo, by Murray Leinster

