
MUNN & CO., PUBLISHERS,
361 BROADWAY, NEW YORK CITY.

       *       *       *       *       *


BUILDING EDITION

OF THE

SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN.

Those who contemplate building should not fail to subscribe.

ONLY $2.50 A YEAR.

Semi-annual bound volumes $2.60 each, yearly bound volumes $3.50 each,
prepaid by mail.

Each number contains elevations and plans of a variety of country
houses; also a handsome

COLORED PLATE.

MUNN &. CO, 361 BROADWAY, NEW YORK.

       *       *       *       *       *


PATENTS!

MESSRS. MUNN & CO., in connection with the publication of the
SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, continue to examine improvements, and to act as
Solicitors of Patents for Inventors.

In this line of business they have had _fifty years' experience_, and
now have _unequated facilities_ for the preparation of Patent
Drawings, Specifications, and the prosecution of Applications for
Patents in the United States, Canada, and Foreign Countries. Messrs.
Munn & Co. also attend to the preparation of Caveats, Copyrights for
Books, Trade Marks, Reissues, Assignments, and Reports on
Infringements of Patents. All business intrusted to them is done with
special care and promptness, on very reasonable terms.

A pamphlet sent free of charge, on application, containing full
information about Patents and how to procure them, directions
concerning Trade Marks, Copyrights, Designs, Patents, Appeals,
Reissues, Infringements, Assignments, Rejected Cases, Hints on the
Sale of Patents, etc.

We also send, _free of charge_, a Synopsis of Foreign Patent Laws
showing the cost and method of securing patents in all the principal
countries of the world.

MUNN & CO., SOLICITORS OF PATENTS,
    361 Broadway, New York.
BRANCH OFFICES.--No. 635 F Street, Washington, D. C.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Scientific American Supplement, No.
1157, March 5, 1898, by Various

