performed very gently and carefully, as otherwise oxygen will rush in so
rapidly as to cause excessive tension. As the bag fills with gas, the
index on the petroleum manometer moves along the arc of a circle and
gradually reaches the desired point. At this point, the supply of oxygen
is cut off, the valve connecting the tension-equalizer with the main
system is opened, and simultaneously the needle-valve on the
reduction-valve of the oxygen cylinder is tightly closed, preliminary to
weighing the cylinder. At this point the motor can be started and the
experiment continued.

It is necessary, then, that the oxygen cylinder be weighed. This is done
after first closing the pet-cock on the end of the pipe conducting the
gas beneath the floor of the calorimeter room, slipping the glass joint
in the rubber pipe leading from the reduction valve to the pet-cock, and
breaking the connections between the two rubber pipes, the one from the
pet-cock and the other to the reduction valve, also breaking the
electrical connection leading to the magnet on the cylinder. The
cylinder is then ready to swing freely without any connections to either
oxygen pipe or electrical wires. It is then weighed, the loss in weight
being noted by removing the brass weights on the shelf attached to the
counterpoise. It is important to see that there is a sufficient number
of brass weights always on the shelf to allow for a maximum loss of
weight of oxygen from the cylinder during a given period. Since the
cylinders contain not far from 4 to 5 kilograms of oxygen, in balancing
the cylinders at the start it is customary to place at least 4 kilograms
of brass weights on the shelf and then adjust the counterpoise so as to
allow for the gradual removal of these weights as the oxygen is
withdrawn.

As soon after the beginning of the period as possible, the U-tubes are
weighed on the analytical balance, and if they have not gained too much
they are connected ready for the next analysis. If they have already
absorbed too much water or carbon dioxide, they are replaced by freshly
filled tubes.

Immediately at the end of the experimental period the barometer is
carefully set and read, and the reading is verified by another
assistant. Throughout the whole experiment an assistant counts the pulse
of the subject frequently, by means of the stethoscope, and records the
respiration rate by noting the lesser fluctuations of the tambour
pointer on the smoked paper. These observations are recorded every few
minutes in a book kept especially for this purpose.

A most excellent preservation of the record of the minor muscular
movements is obtained by dipping the smoked paper on the kymograph drum
in a solution of resin and alcohol. The lesser movements on the paper
indicate the respiration rate, but every minor muscular movement, such
as moving the arm or shifting the body in any way, is shown by a large
deflection of the pointer out of the regular zone of vibration. These
records of the minor muscular activity are of great importance in
interpreting the results of the chemical and physical determinations.

FOOTNOTES:

[5] W. O. Atwater and F. G. Benedict: A respiration calorimeter with
appliances for the direct determination of oxygen. Carnegie Institution
of Washington Publication No. 42, p. 91. (1905.)

Francis G. Benedict: The influence of inanition on metabolism. Carnegie
Institution of Washington Publication No. 77, p. 451. (1907.)

[6] W. O. Atwater and F. G. Benedict: A respiration calorimeter with
appliances for the direct determination of oxygen. Carnegie Institution
of Washington Publication No. 42, p. 114. (1905.)

[7] W. O. Atwater and F. G. Benedict: A respiration calorimeter with
appliances for the direct determination of oxygen. Carnegie Institution
of Washington Publication No. 42, p. 158. (1905.)

[8] Armsby: U. S. Dept. of Agr., Bureau of Animal Industry Bull. 51, p.
34. (1903.)

[9] Benedict and Snell: Eine neue Methode um Koerpertemperaturen zu
messen. Archiv f. d. ges. Physiologie, Bd. 88, pp. 492-500. (1901.)

W. O. Atwater and F. G. Benedict: A respiration calorimeter with
appliances for the direct determination of oxygen. Carnegie Institution
of Washington Publication No. 42, p. 156. (1905.)

[10] Rosa: U. S. Dept. of Agric., Office of Experiment Stations Bul. 63,
p. 25.

[11] Smith: Heat of evaporation of water. Physical Review, vol. 25, p.
145. (1907.)

[12] Philosophical Transactions, vol. 199, A, p. 149. (1902.)

[13] This is in agreement with the value 579.6 calories found by F.
Henning, Ann. d. Physik, vol. 21, p. 849. (1906.)

[14] Pembrey: Schaefer's Text-book of Physiology, vol. 1, p. 838. (1898.)

[15] Benedict and Snell: Koerpertemperatur Schwankungen mit besonderer
Ruecksicht auf den Einfluss, welchen die Umkehrung der taeglichen
Lebensgewoehnheit beim Menschen ausuebt. Archiv f. d. ges. Physiologie,
Bd. 90. p. 33. (1902.)

Benedict: Studies in body-temperature: I. The influence of the inversion
of the daily routine: the temperature of night-workers. American Journal
of Physiology, vol. 11, p. 145. (1904.)

[16] W. O. Atwater and E. B. Rosa: Description of a new respiration
calorimeter and experiments on the conservation of energy in the human
body. U. S. Dept. of Agr., Office of Experiment Stations Bul. 63.
(1899.)

[17] Specific heat of water at average temperature of the water in the
heat-absorbing system referred to the specific heat of water at 20 deg. C.

[18] W. O. Atwater and F. G. Benedict: A respiration calorimeter with
appliances for the direct determination of oxygen. Carnegie Institution
of Washington Publication No. 42, p. 18. (1905.)

[19] For a description of the apparatus and the method of filling see W.
O. Atwater and F. G. Benedict: A respiration calorimeter with appliances
for the direct determination of oxygen. Carnegie Institution of
Washington Publication No. 43, p. 27. (1905.)

[20] W. O. Atwater and F. G. Benedict: A respiration calorimeter with
appliances for the direct determination of oxygen. Carnegie Institution
of Washington Publication No. 42, p. 56. (1905.)

[21] W. O. Atwater and F. G. Benedict: A respiration calorimeter with
appliances for the direct determination of oxygen. Carnegie Institution
of Washington Publication No. 42, p. 20. (1905.)

[22] Thorne M. Carpenter and Francis G. Benedict: Mercurial poisoning of
men in a respiration chamber. American Journal of Physiology, vol. 24,
p. 187. (1909.)

[23] Francis G. Benedict: A method of calibrating gas-meters. Physical
Review, vol. 22, p. 294. (1906.)

[24] Atwater and Benedict: _Loc. cit._, p. 38.

[25] Atwater and Benedict: Carnegie Institution of Washington
Publication No. 42, p. 77.

[26] In the use of logarithms space is saved by not employing
characteristics.

[27] Francis G. Benedict: An apparatus for studying the respiratory
exchange. American Journal of Physiology, vol. 24, p. 368. (1909.)

[28] Squibb: Journal of American Chemical Society, vol. 19, p. 111.
(1897.)

[29] Squibb: Ephemeris, 1884 to 1885, part 2, pp. 562-577.

[30] Morley: Journal of American Chemical Society, vol. 26, p. 1185.
(1904.)

[31] W. P. Lombard: A method of recording changes in body-weight which
occur within short intervals of time. The Journal of the American
Medical Association, vol. 47, p. 1790. (1906.)

[32] Atwater and Benedict: _Loc. cit._, p. 21.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Respiration Calorimeters for Studying
the Respiratory Exchange and Energy Transformations of Man, by Francis Gano Benedict and Thorne M. Carpenter

