rooms, are invited to communicate with the undersigned. Our work extends
to all parts of the country. Estimates, plans, and drawings promptly
prepared. Terms moderate. Address

                  MUNN & CO., 361 BROADWAY, NEW YORK.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                  THE

                    Scientific American Supplement.

                           PUBLISHED WEEKLY.

                  Terms of Subscription, $5 a year.

Sent by mail, postage prepaid, to subscribers in any part of the United
States or Canada. Six dollars a year, sent, prepaid, to any foreign
country.

All the back numbers of THE SUPPLEMENT, from the commencement, January 1,
1876, can be had. Price, 10 cents each.

All the back volumes of THE SUPPLEMENT can likewise be supplied. Two
volumes are issued yearly. Price of each volume, $2.50 stitched in paper,
or $3.50 bound in stiff covers.

COMBINED RATES.--One copy of SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN and one copy of
SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT, one year, postpaid, $7.00.

A liberal discount to booksellers, news agents, and canvassers.

                   MUNN & CO., Publishers,

                          361 Broadway, New York, N. Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

                        Useful Engineering Books

Manufacturers, Agriculturists, Chemists, Engineers, Mechanics, Builders,
men of leisure, and professional men, of all classes, need good books in
the line of their respective callings. Our post office department permits
the transmission of books through the mails at very small cost. A
comprehensive catalogue of useful books by different authors, on more than
fifty different subjects, has recently been published, for free
circulation, at the office of this paper. Subjects classified with names
of author. Persons desiring a copy have only to ask for it, and it will be
mailed to them. Address,

                   MUNN & CO., 361 Broadway, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *

                                PATENTS.

In connection with the =Scientific American=, Messrs. MUNN & CO. are
solicitors of American and Foreign Patents, have had 42 years' experience,
and now have the largest establishment in the world. Patents are obtained
on the best terms.

A special notice is made in the =Scientific American= of all inventions
patented through this Agency, with the name and residence of the Patentee.
By the immense circulation thus given, public attention is directed to the
merits of the new patent, and sales or introduction often easily effected.

Any person who has made a new discovery or invention can ascertain, free
of charge, whether a patent can probably be obtained, by writing to MUNN &
CO.

We also send free our Hand Book about the Patent Laws, Patents, Caveats,
Trade Marks, their costs, and how procured. Address

                       MUNN & CO.,

                            361 Broadway, New York.

           Branch Office, 622 and 624 F St., Washington, D. C.

       *       *       *       *       *




                         Transcriber's Amendments


Transcriber's Note: Some illustrations may have been moved. We have
rendered consistent on a per-word-pair basis the hyphenation or spacing of
such pairs when repeated in the same grammatical context. The table of
contents has been moved to the front.

Other changes are listed below. The listed source publication page number
also applies in this reproduction except for the table of contents since
it has been moved.

    Page          Change

  10343  [Fig. 1 redrawn slightly to reduce the reader's confusion.]
  10345  [NATURE.][Heading deleted.]
  10345  12,600 lb. per square inch[(psi)].[also in following lines.]
  10346  [First line of heading moved to footnote.]
  10347  as much as [a] plank of the same size
  10347  For these upper floors hard-wood[hardwood] plank,
  10349  asserted pretty generally thoughout[throughout] the country
  10349  employes[employees] will no longer be known as "gas house
  10350  reappear in the little glow lamp[glow-lamp][multiple instances]
  10351  through[though] I doubt whether it is visible
  10351  due to the vacum[vacuum],
  10351  and to the atonishment[astonishment] of my fellow
  10352  the many disagreeable symptons[symptoms],
  10352  [Part of Care of The Eyes header moved to footnote.]
  10354  but on miscroscopical[microscopical] examination
  10354  neigborhood[neighborhood] in which we live.
  10355  It[Its] parallax, as determined by Sir R. S. Ball,
  10355  The well known[well-known] double star 61 Cygni
  10356  [Fig. 3: Illegible text re-composed.]
  10358  [Advertisements header added.]
  10358  [Table of contents moved to front of publication.]
  10358  The One Hundred and Twenty Foot[Ton] Shears {Table of Contents}

       *       *       *       *       *






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Scientific American Supplement, No.
648, June 2, 1888., by Various

