the rude attempt of the artist to preserve individuality in his
portraits; and especially to the singularly erect bearing of the Duke, by
which he is at once recognised wherever he is introduced. Less pains are
taken with the portrait of Harold; but even in that a certain elegance of
proportion, and length of limb, as well as height of stature, are
generally preserved.

[204]  Bayeux tapestry.

[205]  AIL. de Vit. Edw.--Many other chroniclers mention this legend, of
which the stones of Westminster Abbey itself prated, in the statues of
Edward and the Pilgrim, placed over the arch in Dean's Yard.

[206]  This ancient Saxon lay, apparently of the date of the tenth or
eleventh century, may be found, admirably translated by Mr. George
Stephens, in the Archaeologia, vol. xxx. p. 259.  In the text the poem is
much abridged, reduced into rhythm, and in some stanzas wholly altered
from the original.  But it is, nevertheless, greatly indebted to Mr.
Stephens's translation, from which several lines are borrowed verbatim.
The more careful reader will note the great aid given to a rhymeless
metre by alliteration.  I am not sure that this old Saxon mode of verse
might not be profitably restored to our national muse.

[207]  People.

[208]  Heaven.

[209]  Omen.

[210]  The Eastern word Satraps (Satrapes) made one of the ordinary and
most inappropriate titles (borrowed, no doubt, from the Byzantine Court),
by which the Saxons, in their Latinity, honoured their simple nobles.

[211]  Afterwards married to Malcolm of Scotland, through whom, by the
female line, the present royal dynasty of England assumes descent from
the Anglo-Saxon kings.

[212]  By his first wife; Aldyth was his second.

[213]  Flor. Wig.

[214]  This truth has been overlooked by writers, who have maintained the
Atheling's right as if incontestable.  "An opinion prevailed," says
Palgrave, "Eng. Commonwealth," pp. 559, 560, "that if the Atheling was
born before his father and mother were ordained to the royal dignity, the
crown did not descend to the child of uncrowned ancestors.  "Our great
legal historian quotes Eadmer, "De Vit. Sanct. Dunstan," p. 220, for the
objection made to the succession of Edward the Martyr, on this score.

[215]  See the judicious remarks of Henry, "Hist. of Britain," on this
head.  From the lavish abuse of oaths, perjury had come to be reckoned
one of the national vices of the Saxon.

[216]  And so, from Gryffyth, beheaded by his subjects, descended Charles
Stuart.

[217]  Brompt. Chron.

[218]  See Note P.

[219]  It seems by the coronation service of Ethelred II. still extant,
that two bishops officiated in the crowning of the King; and hence,
perhaps, the discrepancy in the chronicles, some contending that Harold
was crowned by Alred, others, by Stigand.  It is noticeable, however,
that it is the apologists of the Normans who assign that office to
Stigand, who was in disgrace with the Pope, and deemed no lawful bishop.
Thus in the Bayeux tapestry the label, "Stigand," is significantly
affixed to the officiating prelate, as if to convey insinuation that
Harold was not lawfully crowned.  Florence, by far the best authority,
says distinctly, that Harold was crowned by Alred.  The ceremonial of the
coronation described in the text, is for the most part given on the
authority of the "Cotton MS." quoted by Sharon Turner, vol. iii. p. 151.

[220]  Introduced into our churches in the ninth century.

[221]  The Wyn-month: October.

[222]  "Snorro Sturleson."  Laing.

[223]  The Vaeringers, or Varangi, mostly Northmen; this redoubtable
force, the Janissaries of the Byzantine empire, afforded brilliant field,
both of fortune and war, to the discontented spirits, or outlawed heroes
of the North.  It was joined afterwards by many of the bravest and best
born of the Saxon nobles, refusing to dwell under the yoke of the Norman.
Scott, in "Count Robert of Paris," which, if not one of his best
romances, is yet full of truth and beauty, has described this renowned
band with much poetical vigor and historical fidelity.

[224] Laing's Snorro Sturleson.--"The old Norwegian ell was less than the
present ell; and Thorlasius reckons, in a note on this chapter, that
Harold's stature would be about four Danish ells; viz. about eight
feet."--Laing's note to the text.  Allowing for the exaggeration of the
chronicler, it seems probable, at least, that Hardrada exceeded seven
feet.  Since (as Laing remarks in the same note), and as we shall see
hereafter, "our English Harold offered him, according to both English and
Danish authority, seven feet of land for a grave, or as much more as his
stature, exceeding that of other men, might require."

[225]  Snorro Sturleson.  See Note Q.

[226]  Snorro Sturleson.

[227]  Hoveden.

[228]  Holinshed.  Nearly all chroniclers (even, with scarce an
exception, those most favouring the Normans), concur in the abilities and
merits of Harold as a king.

[229]  "Vit. Harold.  Chron. Ang. Norm." ii, 243.

[230]  Hoveden.

[231]  Malmesbury.

[232]  Supposed to be our first port for shipbuilding.--FOSBROOKE, p.
320.

[233]  Pax.

[234]  Some of the Norman chroniclers state that Robert, Archbishop of
Canterbury, who had been expelled from England at Godwin's return, was
Lanfranc's companion in this mission; but more trustworthy authorities
assure us that Robert had been dead some years before, not long surviving
his return into Normandy.

[235]  Saxon Chronicle.

[236]  Saxon Chronicle.--"When it was the nativity of St. Mary, then were
the men's provisions gone, and no man could any longer keep them there."

[237]  It is curious to notice how England was represented as a country
almost heathen; its conquest was regarded quite as a pious, benevolent
act of charity--a sort of mission for converting the savages.  And all
this while England was under the most slavish ecclesiastical domination,
and the priesthood possessed a third of its land!  But the heart of
England never forgave that league of the Pope with the Conqueror; and the
seeds of the Reformed Religion were trampled deep into the Saxon soil by
the feet of the invading Norman.

[238]  WILLIAM OF POITIERS.--The naive sagacity of this bandit argument,
and the Norman's contempt for Harold's deficiency in "strength of mind,"
are exquisite illustrations of character.

[239]  Snorro Sturleson.

[240]  Does any Scandinavian scholar know why the trough was so
associated with the images of Scandinavian witchcraft?  A witch was
known, when seen behind, by a kind of trough-like shape; there must be
some symbol, of very ancient mythology, in this superstition!

[241]  Snorro Sturleson.

[242]  Snorro Sturleson.

[243]  So Thierry translates the word: others, the Land-ravager.  In
Danish, the word is Land-ode, in Icelandic, Land-eydo.--Note to Thierry's
"Hist. of the Conq. of England," book iii. vol. vi. p. 169 (of Hazlitt's
translation).

[244]  Snorro Sturleson.

[245]  See Snorro Sturleson for this parley between Harold in person and
Tostig.  The account differs from the Saxon chroniclers, but in this
particular instance is likely to be as accurate.

[246] Snorro Sturleson.

[247] Snorro Sturleson.

[248]  Sharon Turner's Anglo-Saxons, vol. ii. p. 396.  Snorro Sturleson.

[249]  Snorro Sturleson.

[250]  The quick succession of events allowed the Saxon army no time to
bury the slain; and the bones of the invaders whitened the field of
battle for many years afterwards.

[251]  It may be said indeed, that, in the following reign, the Danes
under Osbiorn (brother of King Sweyn), sailed up the Humber; but it was
to assist the English, not to invade them.  They were bought off by the
Normans,--not conquered.

[252]  The Saxons sat at meals with their heads covered.

[253]  Henry.

[254]  Palgrave--"Hist. of Anglo-Saxons."

[255]  Palgrave--"Hist. of Anglo-Saxons."

[256]  The battle-field of Hastings seems to have been called Senlac,
before the Conquest, Sanguelac after it.

[257]  Traitor-messenger.

[258]  "Ne meinent od els chevalier,
        Varlet a pie De eskuier;
        Ne nul d'els n'a armes portee,
        Forz sol escu, lance, et espee."
                 Roman de Rou, Second Part, v. 12, 126.

[259]  "Ke d'une angarde [eminence] u ils 'estuient
        Cels de l'ost virent, ki pres furent."
                 Roman de Rou, Second Part, v. 12, 126.

[260]  Midnight.

[261]  This counsel the Norman chronicler ascribes to Gurth, but it is so
at variance with the character of that hero, that it is here assigned to
the unscrupulous intellect of Haco.

[262]  Osborne--(Asbiorn),--one of the most common of Danish and
Norwegian names.  Tonstain, Toustain, or Tostain, the same as Tosti, or
Tostig,--Danish.  (Harold's brother is called Tostain or Toustain, in the
Norman chronicles).  Brand, a name common to Dane or Norwegian--Bulmer is
a Norwegian name, and so is Bulver or Bolvaer--which is, indeed, so
purely Scandinavian that it is one of the warlike names given to Odin
himself by the Norse-scalds.  Bulverhithe still commemorates the landing
of a Norwegian son of the war-god.  Bruce, the ancestor of the deathless
Scot, also bears in that name, more illustrious than all, the proof of
his Scandinavian birth.

[263]  This mail appears in that age to have been sewn upon linen or
cloth.  In the later age of the crusaders, it was more artful, and the
links supported each other, without being attached to any other material.

[264]  Bayeux tapestry.

[265]  The cross-bow is not to be seen in the Bayeux tapestry--the Norman
bows are not long.

[266]  Roman de Rou.

[267]  William of Poitiers.

[268]  Dieu nous aide.

[269]  Thus, when at the battle of Barnet, Earl Warwick, the king-maker,
slew his horse and fought on foot, he followed the old traditional
customs of Saxon chiefs.

[270]  "Devant li Dus alout cantant
        De Karlemaine e de Rollant,
        Ed 'Olever e des Vassalls
        Ki morurent en Ronchevals."
              Roman de Rou, Part ii. I. 13, 151.

Much research has been made by French antiquaries, to discover the old
Chant de Roland, but in vain.

[271]  W. PICT. Chron. de Nor.

[272]  For, as Sir F. Palgrave shrewdly conjectures, upon the
dismemberment of the vast earldom of Wessex, on Harold's accession to the
throne, that portion of it comprising Sussex (the old government of his
grandfather Wolnoth) seems to have been assigned to Gurth.

[273]  Harold's birthday was certainly the 14th of October.  According to
Mr. Roscoe, in his "Life of William the Conqueror," William was born also
on the 14th of October.

[274]  William Pict.

[275]  Thus Wace,

    "Guert (Gurth) vit Engleiz amenuisier,
     Vi K'il n'i ont nul recovrier," etc.

"Gurth saw the English diminish, and that there was no hope to retrieve
the day; the Duke pushed forth with such force, that he reached him, and
struck him with great violence (par grant air).  I know not if he died by
the stroke, but it is said that it laid him low."

[276]  The suggestions implied in the text will probably be admitted as
correct; when we read in the Saxon annals of the recognition of the dead,
by peculiar marks on their bodies; the obvious, or at least the most
natural explanation of those signs, is to be found in the habit of
puncturing the skin, mentioned by the Malmesbury chronicler.

[277]  The contemporary Norman chronicler, William of Poitiers.  See Note
(R).

[278]  See Note (R).

[279]  "Rex magnus parva jacet hic Gulielmus in urna--
        Sufficit et magno parva Domus Domino."

From William the Conqueror's epitaph (ap-Gemiticen).  His bones are said
to have been disinterred some centuries after his death.

[280]  Thomson's Essay on Magna Charta.

[281]  Orderic. Vital. lib. 4.

[282]  The date of William's marriage has been variously stated in
English and Norman history, but is usually fixed in 1051-2.  M. Pluquet,
however, in a note to his edition of the "Roman de Rou," says that the
only authority for the date of that marriage is in the Chronicle of
Tours, and it is there referred to 1053.  It would seem that the Papal
excommunication was not actually taken off till 1059; nor the formal
dispensation for the marriage granted till 1063.

[283]  For authorities for the above sketch, and for many interesting
details of Lanfranc's character, see Orderic. Vital.  Hen. de Knyghton,
lib. ii. Gervasius; and the life of Lanfranc, to be found in the
collection of his Works, etc.

[284]  Pigott's Scand. Mythol. p. 380.  Half. Vand. Saga.

[285]  "Suthsaxonum Ministrum Wolfnothem."  Flor. Wig.

[286]  Asser. de Reb. Gest. Alf. pp. 17, 18.

[287]  Camden, Caernarvonshire.

[288]  Pennant's Wales, vol. ii. p. 146.

[289]  The ruins still extant are much diminished since the time even of
Pownall or Pennant; and must be indeed inconsiderable, compared with the
buildings or walls which existed at the date of my tale.

[290]  Johann. ap. Acad. Celt. tom. iii. p. 151.

[291]  William of Poitiers.

[292]  He is considered to refer to such bequest in one of his charters:
"Devicto Harlodo rege cum suis complicibus qui michi regnum prudentia
Domini destinatum, et beneficio concessionis Domini et cognati mei
gloriosi regis Edwardi concessum conati sunt auferre."--FORESTINA, A. 3.

But William's word is certainly not to be taken, for he never scrupled to
break it; and even in these words he does not state that it was left him
by Edward's will, but destined and given to him--words founded, perhaps,
solely on the promise referred to, before Edward came to the throne,
corroborated by some messages in the earlier years of his reign, through
the Norman Archbishop of Canterbury, who seems to have been a notable
intriguer to that end.

[293]  Palgrave, "Commonwealth," 560.

[294]  "Quo tumulato, subregulus Haroldus Godwin Ducis filius, quem rex
ante suam decessionem regni successorem elegerat, a totius Angliae
primatibus, ad regale culmen electus, die eodem ab Aldredo Eboracensi
Archiepiscopo in regem est honorifice consecratus."--FLOR. Wig.

[295]  Some of these Norman chroniclers tell an absurd story of Harold's
seizing the crown from the hand of the bishop, and putting it himself on
his head.  The Bayeux Tapestry, which is William's most connected apology
for his claim, shows no such violence; but Harold is represented as
crowned very peaceably.  With more art, (as I have observed elsewhere,)
the Tapestry represents Stigand as crowning him instead of Alred; Stigand
being at that time under the Pope's interdict.

[296]  Edward died Jan. 5th.  Harold's coronation is said to have taken
place Jan. the 12th; but there is no very satisfactory evidence as to the
precise day; indeed some writers would imply that he was crowned the day
after Edward's death, which is scarcely possible.

[297]  Vit. Harold. Chron. Ang. Norm.

[298]  Laing's Note to Snorro Sturleson, vol. iii. p. 101.

[299]  This William Mallet was the father of Robert Mallet, founder of
the Priory of Eye, in Suffolk (a branch of the House of Mallet de
Graville).--PLUQUET.  He was also the ancestor of the great William
Mallet (or Malet, as the old Scandinavian name was now corruptly spelt),
one of the illustrious twenty-five "conservators" of Magna Charta.  The
family is still extant; and I have to apologise to Sir Alexander Malet,
Bart. (Her Majesty's Minister at Stutgard), Lieut.-Col. Charles St. Lo
Malet, the Rev. William Windham Malet (Vicar of Ardley), and other
members of that ancient House, for the liberty taken with the name of
their gallant forefather.



THE END.





End of Project Gutenberg's Harold, Complete, by Edward Bulwer-Lytton

