his own son _meus Cicero_. -- NEMO VIR: see n. on 21 _quemquam senem_. --
QUOD CONTRA: = [Greek: ho tounantion], 'whereas on the contrary'; cf. n. on
Lael. 90 where, as well as here, many of the editors make the mistake of
taking _quod_ to be the accusative governed by _contra_ out of place. --
MEUM: _sc. corpus cremari_. -- QUO: put for _ad quae_, as often. -- VISUS
SUM: 'people thought I bore up bravely'. -- NON QUO ... SED: a relative
clause parallel with a categorically affirmative clause. The usage is not
uncommon, though Cic. often has _non quo ... sed quia_. For mood of
_ferrem_ see A. 341, _d_, Rem.; G. 541, Rem. 1.; H. 516, II. 2.

85. DIXISTI: in 4. -- QUI: here = _cum ego_, 'since I ...'. -- EXTORQUERI
VOLO: n. on 2 _levari volo_. -- MINUTI PHILOSOPHI: for the word _minutus_
cf. n. on 46; Cic. has _minuti philosophi_ in Acad. 2, 75; Div. 1, 62; in
Fin. 1, 61 _minuti et angusti (homines)_; in Brut. 265 _m. imperatores_;
cf. Suet. Aug. 83 _m. pueri_. -- SENTIAM: future indicative. -- PERACTIO:
the noun is said to occur only here in Cic.; cf. however 64 _peragere_; 70.
-- HAEC ... DICEREM: the same words occur at the end of the Laelius; for
_habeo quod dicam_ Cic. often says _habeo dicere_, as in Balb. 34.

[1] Horace, Ep. 2, 1, 156:--

  _Graecia capta ferum victorem cepit, et artes
  Intulit agresti Latio._

[2] De Off. 1, 1 2: _philosophandi scientiam concedens multis_ etc.

[3] To judge rightly of Cicero it must be remembered that he was a
politician only by accident: his whole natural bent was towards literature.

[4] To see the truth of this it is only necessary to refer for example to
the weight given to the opinions of Cicero in the heated political
discussions of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.

[5] Almost every branch of learning was ranked under the head of
Philosophy. Strabo even claimed that one branch of Philosophy was
Geography.

[6] 2, 3 _interiectus est nuper liber is quem ad nostrum Atticum de
senectute misimus._ No argument can be founded on the words _interiectus
est_, over which the editors have wasted much ingenuity. They simply mean
'there was inserted in the series of my works'.

[7] See 2, 23.

[8] 14, 21, 3; 16, 3, 1; 16, 11, 3.

[9] See Att. 14, 21, 1.

[10] It was certainly not written, as Sommerbrodt assumes, in the intervals
of composing the _De Divinatione_. The words in 2, 7 of that work--_quoniam
de re publica consuli coepti sumus_ etc.--point to the end of September or
beginning of October, 44, when Cicero returned to Rome and began to compose
his Philippic orations.

[11] Sec. 1.

[12] It is perhaps not a mere accident that the prowess of L. Brutus _in
liberanda patria_ is mentioned in Sec. 75. There may be a reference to the
latest Brutus who had freed his country.

[13] In March, 45.

[14] Sec. 12.

[15] Sec. 84.

[16] See p. iii. above.

[17] In the notes exact references will be given to the places in the
original where the other passages mentioned may be found.

[18] Particularly the first book of the _Tusculan Disputations_, the _De
Republica_, and the _Laelius_.

[19] See 4, below.

[20] Sec. 3.

[21] Works on Old Age are said to have been written by Theophrastus and
Demetrius Phalereus, either or both of which Cicero might have used. One
passage in Sec. 67, _facilius in morbos ... tristius curantur_, is supposed by
many to have been imitated from Hippocrates; but the resemblance is
probably accidental. Cf. De Off. 1, 24, 83.

[22] See Sec. 2.

[23] See Att. 16, 11, 3; 16, 3, 1; 14, 21, 3.

[24] Sec. 2.

[25] As Cicero's intention was to set old age in a favorable light, he
slights Aristo Cius for giving to Tithonus the chief part in a dialogue on
old age. See Sec. 3; cf. also Laelius, Sec. 4.

[26] See below (ii.), 1.

[27] On the whole subject of Aristotle's dialogues see Bernays' monograph,
_Die Dialoge des Aristoteles_.

[28] Sec. 32 _quartum ago annum et octogesimum_. Cf. Lael. 11 _memini Catonem
ante quam est mortuus mecum et cum Scipione disserere_ etc.

[29] Cicero always indicates this date; cf. Sec. 14. Some other writers, as
Livy, give, probably wrongly, an earlier date.

[30] He himself says (Festus, p.28l) _ego iam a principio in parsimonia
atque in duritia atque industria omnem adulescentiam, abstinui agro
colendo, saxis Sabinis silicibus repastinandis atque conserendis_. Cf.
Gell. _Noct. Att._ 13, 23.

[31] See Cat. M. 44.

[32] Plut. C. 1; Cat. M. Sec.Sec. 18, 32: Cato himself ap. Fest. s.v.
_ordinarius_ says _quid mihi fieret si non ego stipendia in ordine omnia
ordinarius meruissem semper?_

[33] Sec. 10.

[34] If Plutarch may be trusted, Cato at the age of 30 had won for himself
the title of 'the Roman Demosthenes'.

[35] Sec. 10.

[36] In Sec. 10 Cicero makes the quaestorship fall in 205, but he refers to
the election, not to the actual year of office.

[37] Nepos (or pseudo-Nepos), Cat. 1.

[38] Cato afterwards made it a charge against M. Fulvius Nobilior that he
had taken Ennius with him on a campaign (Tusc. 1, 3). But Cato used Ennius
as soldier while Nobilior employed him as poet.

[39] It is difficult, however, to fix the date of this enactment. Some
authorities place it after Cato's return from Spain.

[40] Livy 34, cc. 1-8.

[41] See Livy, 34, 18.

[42] _i.e._ he was _legatus consularis_. It was at the time a common thing
for ex-consuls to take service under their successors. So Liv. 36, 17, 1,
but Cic. Cat. M. c 10 says _tribunus militaris_.

[43] Cicero's statements throughout the treatise concerning the relations
between Cato and Africanus the elder, particularly in Sec. 77 where Cato calls
his enemy _amicissimus_, are audaciously inexact.

[44] See Cato M. Sec. 42.

[45] We possess the titles of 26 speeches delivered during or concerning
his censorship.

[46] He is said to have undergone 44 prosecutions, and to have been
prosecutor as often.

[47] See Lael. 9; Cat. M. 12 and 84.

[48] Cf. Livy, 39, 40.

[49] The common view is that Cato said nothing of Roman history from
509-266 B.C.

[50] Cf. Cic. pro Arch. 7, 16.

[51] See Coulanges, 'Ancient City', Bk. II. Ch. 4.

[52] See Sec.Sec. 12, 41 etc.

[53] De Or. 2, 170; Fam. 9, 21, 3; Qu. Fr. 2, 3, 3.

[54] In _De Re Publica_ 2, 1 Cicero makes Scipio talk extravagantly of
Cato.

[55] See Introduction to the Laelius, pp. vi, vii.

[56] A. = Allen and Greenough's Grammar, Revised Ed.; G. = Gildersleeve's
Grammar; H. = Harkness's Grammar, Rev. Ed. of 1881. In quoting from the
works of Cicero reference is made to sections, not to chapters.






End of Project Gutenberg's Cato Maior de Senectute, by Marcus Tullius Cicero

