National party and inserted a free silver plank in their platform.

In the canvass which followed, calumny and misrepresentation were for
once discarded in favor of genuine discussion. This new attitude was
largely due to organizations for spreading information quite apart from
regular party management. In this way, many able pamphlets were issued
and widely circulated. The Republicans had ample campaign funds; but
though the Democrats were poorly supplied, this deficiency did not
abate the energy of Bryan's campaign. He traveled over eighteen thousand
miles, speaking at nearly every stopping place to great assemblages.
McKinley, on the contrary, stayed at home, although he delivered an
effective series of speeches to visiting delegations. The outcome seemed
doubtful, but the intense anxiety which was prevalent was promptly
dispelled when the election returns began to arrive. By going over to
free silver, the Democrats wrested from the Republicans all the mining
States, except California, together with Kansas and Nebraska, but the
electoral votes which they thus secured were a poor compensation for
losses elsewhere. Such old Democratic strongholds as Delaware, Maryland,
and West Virginia gave McKinley substantial majorities, and Kentucky
gave him twelve of her thirteen electoral votes. McKinley's popular
plurality was over six hundred thousand, and he had a majority of
ninety-five in the electoral college.

The nation approved the position which Cleveland had maintained, but the
Republican party reaped the benefit by going over to that position while
the Democratic party was ruined by forsaking it. Party experience during
the Cleveland era contained many lessons, but none clearer than that
presidential leadership is essential both to legislative achievement and
to party success.




BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE

Among general histories dealing with this period, the leading authority
is D. R. Dewey, "National Problems," 1885-97 (1907) in "The American
Nation"; but suggestive accounts may be found in E. B. Andrews, "History
of the Last Quarter of a Century in the United States" (1896); in H.
T. Peck, "Twenty Years of the Republic" (1913); and in C. A. Beard,
"Contemporary American History" (1914).

The following works dealing especially with party management and
congressional procedure will be found serviceable: E. Stanwood, "History
of the Presidency" (1898); M. P. Follett, "The Speaker of the House of
Representatives" (1896); H. J. Ford, "The Rise and Growth of American
Politics" (1898); H. J. Ford, "The Cost of our National Government"
(1910); S. W. McCall, "The Business of Congress" (1911); D. S.
Alexander, "History and Procedure of the House of Representatives"
(1916); C. R. Atkinson, "The Committee on Rules and the Overthrow of
Speaker" Cannon (1911). The debate of 1885-86 on revision of the rules
is contained in the "Congressional Record," 49th Congress, 1st session,
vol. 17, part I, pp. 39, 71, 87, 102 129, 182, 9,16, 216, 239, 304.

Of special importance from the light they throw upon the springs
of action are the following works: Grover Cleveland, "Presidential
Problems" (1904); F. E. Goodrich, "The Life and Public Services of
Grover Cleveland" (1884); G. F. Parker, "The Writings and Speeches of
Grover Cleveland" (1890); J. L. Whittle, "Grover Cleveland" (1896); J.
G. Blaine, "Political Discussions" (1887); E. Stanwood, "James Gillespie
Blaine" (1905); A. R. Conkling, "Life and Letters of Roscoe Conkling"
(1889); John Sherman, "Recollections of Forty Years in the House,
Senate, and Cabinet" (1895); G. F. Hoar, "Autobiography of Seventy
Years" (1903); S. M. Cullom, "Fifty Years of Public Service" (1911); L.
A. Coolidge, "An Old-fashioned Senator: Orville H. Platt of Connecticut"
(1910); S. W. McCall, "The Life of Thomas Brackett Reed" (1914); A. E.
Stevenson, "Something of Men I Have Known" (1909).

For the financial history of the period, see J. L. Laughlin, "The
History of Bimetallism in the United States" (1897); A. D. Noyes, "Forty
Years of American Finance" (1909); Horace White, "Money and Banking,
Illustrated by American History" (1904).

The history of tariff legislation is recorded by F. W. Taussig, "The
Tariff History of the United States" (1914), and E. Stanwood, "American
Tariff Controversies in the Nineteenth Century" (1903).

On the trust problem there is much valuable information in W. Z. Ripley,
"Trusts, Pools, and Corporations" (1905); K. Coman, "Industrial History
of the United States" (1905); J. W. Jenks, "The Trust Problem" (1905).

The conditions which prompted the creation of the Interstate Commerce
Commission are exhibited in the report of the Senate Select Committee
on Interstate Commerce, "Senate Reports," No. 46, 49th Congress, 1st
session.

Useful special treatises on the railroad problem are E. R. Johnson,
"American Railway Transportation" (1903); B. H. Meyer, "Railway
Legislation in the United States" (1903); and W. Z. Ripley, "Railway
Problems" (1907).

The history of labor movements may be followed in J. R. Commons,
"History of Labor in the United States" (1918); M. Hillquit, "History
of Socialism in the United States" (1903); "Report of the Industrial
Commission," vol. XVII (1901); and in the Annual Reports of the United
States Commissioner of Labor. Congressional investigations of particular
disturbances produced the House Reports No. 4174, 49th Congress, 2d
session, 1887, on the Southwestern Railway Strike, and No. 2447, 52d
Congress, 2d session, 1893, on the Homestead Strike.

On the subject of pensions the most comprehensive study is that by W. H.
Glasson, "History of Military Pension Legislation in the United States,
Columbia University Studies," vol. XII, No. 3 (1900). Of special
interest is the speech by J. H. Gallinger, "Congressional Record," 65th
Congress, 2d session, vol. 56, No. 42, p. 1937.

Other public documents of special importance are "Senate Report," No.
606, 53d Congress, concerning the sugar scandal, and "Senate Documents,"
No. 187, 54th Congress, 2d session, concerning the bond sales. "The
Congressional Record" is at all times a mine of information. Valuable
historical material is contained in the "New Princeton Review," vols.
I-VI (1886-88), the New York "Nation," the "Political Science Quarterly,"
and other contemporary periodicals.

A vivid picture of political conditions on the personal side is given in
Slason Thompson, "Eugene Field" (1901), vol. I, chap. 10; vol. II, chap.
8.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Cleveland Era, by Henry Jones Ford

