predecessor. His general idea of Horace stands recorded in a most
admirable didactick poem; in the course of which he seems to have kept a
steady eye on this work of our author.

  Horace still charms with graceful negligence,
  And WITHOUT METHOD talks us into sense;
  Will, like a friend, familiarly convey
  The truest notions in the easiest way:
  He, who supreme in judgment, as in wit,
  Might boldly censure, as he boldly writ,
  Yet judg'd with coolness, tho' he sung with fire;
  His precepts teach but what his works inspire.
  Our Criticks take a contrary extreme,
  They judge with fury, but they write with flegm:
  NOR SUFFERS HORACE MORE IN WRONG TRANSLATIONS
  By Wits, THAN CRITICKS IN AS WRONG QUOTATIONS.

  Essay on Criticism.


                *     *     *     *     *


I have now compleated my observations on this popular Work of Horace, of
which I at first attempted the version and illustration, as a matter of
amusement but which, I confess, I have felt, in the progress, to be an
arduous undertaking, and a laborious task. Such parts of the Epistle, as
corresponded with the general ideas of Modern Poetry, and the Modern
Drama, I flattered myself with the hopes of rendering tolerable to the
English Reader; but when I arrived at those passages, wholly relative to
the Antient Stage, I began to feel my friends dropping off, and leaving
me a very thin audience. My part too grew less agreeable, as it grew
more difficult. I was almost confounded in the Serio-Comick scenes of
the Satyrick Piece: In the musical department I was ready, with Le
Fevre, to execrate the Flute, and all the Commentators on it; and when I
found myself reduced to scan the merits and of Spondees and Trimeters, I
almost fancied myself under the dominion of some _plagosus Orbilius,_
and translating the _prosodia_ of the Latin Grammar. Borrowers and
Imitators cull the sweets, and suck the classick flowers, rejecting at
pleasure all that appears sour, bitter, or unpalatable. Each of them
travels at his ease in the high turnpike-road of poetry, quoting the
authority of Horace himself to keep clear of difficulties;

  --et que
  Desperat tractata nitescere posse, relinquit.

A translator must stick close to his Author, follow him up hill and down
dale, over hedge and ditch, tearing his way after his leader thro' the
thorns and brambles of literature, sometimes lost, and often benighted.

  A master I have, and I am his man,
  Galloping dreary dun!

The reader, I fear, will fancy I rejoice too much at having broke loose
from my bondage, and that I grow wanton with the idea of having regained
my liberty. I shall therefore engage an advocate to recommend me to his
candour and indulgence; and as I introduced these notes with some lines
from a noble Poet of our own country, I shall conclude them with an
extract from a French Critick: Or, if I may speak the language of my
trade, as I opened these annotations with a Prologue from Roscommon, I
shall drop the curtain with an Epilogue from Dacier. Another curtain
now demands my attention. I am called from the Contemplation of Antient
Genius, to sacrifice, with due respect, to Modern Taste: I am summoned
from a review of the magnificent spectacles of Greece and Rome, to the
rehearsal of a Farce at the Little Theatre in the Haymarket.

                   *     *     *     *     *

Voila tout ce que j'ai cru necessaire pour l'intelligence de la Poetique
d'Horace! si Jule Scaliger l'avoit bien entendue, il lui auroit rendu
plus de justice, & en auroit parle plus modestment. Mais il ne s'eflort
pat donne la temps de le bien comprendre. Ce Livre estoit trop petit
pour estre goute d'un homme comme lui, qui faisoit grand cas des gros
volumes, & qui d'ailleurs aimoit bien mieux donner des regles que d'en
recevoir. Sa Poetique est assurement un ouvrage d'une erudition infinie;
on y trouve par tout des choses fort recherchees, & elle est toute
pleine de faillies qui marquent beaucoup d'esprit: mais j'oferai dire
qu'il n'y a point de justessee dans la pluspart de fes jugemens, & que
sa critique n'est pas heureuse. Il devoit un peu plus etudier ces grands
maitres, pour se corriger de ce defaut, qui rendra toujours le plus
grand savoir inutile, ou au moins rude &c sec. Comme un homme delicat
etanchera mille fois mieux sa soif, & boira avec plus de gout & de
plaisir dans un ruisseau dont les eaux seront clairs & pures, que dans
un fleuve plein de bourbe & de limon: tout de meme, un esprit fin qui ne
cherche que la justesse & une certaine fleur de critique, trouvera bien
mieux son compte dans ce petite traite d'Horace, qu'il ne le trouverait
dans vingt volumes aussi enormes que la Poetique de Scaliger. On peut
dire veritablement que celuy qui boit dans cette source pure, plate se
_proluit auro;_ & tant pis pour celuy qui ne fait pas le connoistre.
Pour moi j'en ai un tres grand cas. Je ne fay si j'auray este assez
heureux pour la bien eclaircir, & pour en dissiper si bien toutes
les difficultes, qu'il n'y en reste aucune. Les plus grandes de ces
difficultes, viennent des passages qu'Horace a imite des Grecs, ou des
allusions qu'il y a faites. Je puis dire au moins que je n'en ay laisse
passer aucune sans l'attaqaer; & je pourrais me vanter,

  --nec tela nec ullas
  V'itamsse vices Danaum.

En general je puis dire que malgre la soule des Commentateurs & des
Traducteurs, Horace estoit tres-malentendu, & que ses plus beaux
endroits estoient defigures par les mauvais sens qu'on leur avoit donnes
jusques icy, & il ne faut paus s'en etonner. La pluspart des gens ne
reconnoissent pas tant l'autorite de la raison que celle du grand
nombre, pour laquelle ils ont un profond respect. Pour moy qui fay qu'en
matiere de critique on ne doit pas comptez les voix, mais les peser;
j'avoiie que j'ay secoue ce joug, _& que sans m'assijetir au sentiment
de personne, j'ay tache de suivre Horace, & de demeler ce qu'il a dit
d'avec ce qu'on luy a fait dire._ J'ay mesme toujours remarque (& j'en
pourrais donner des exemples bien sensibles) que quand des esprits
accoutumes aux cordes, comme dit Montagne, & qui n'osent tenter de
franches allures, entreprennent de traduire & de commenter ces excellens
Ouvrages, _ou il y a plus de finesse & plus de mystere qu'il n'en
paroist,_ tout leur travail ne fait que les gater, & que la seule vertu
qu'ayent leurs copies, c'est de nous degouter presque des originaux.
Comme j'ay pris la liberte de juger du travail de ceux qui m'ont
precede, & que je n'ay pas fait difficulte de les condamner
tres-souvent, je declare que je ne trouveray nullement mauvais qu'on
juge du mien, & qu'on releve mes fautes: il est difficile qu'il n'y en
ait, & mesme beaucoup; si quelqu'un veut donc se donner la peine de
me reprendre, & de me faire voir que j'ay mal pris le sens, je me
corrigeray avec plaisir: car je ne cherche que la verite, qui n'a jamais
blesse personne: au lieu qu'on se trouve tou-jours mal de persister dans
son ignorance et dans son erreur.

Dacier

THE END.









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Art Of Poetry An Epistle To The
Pisos, by Horace

