in large numbers. I wish to carry them to our hermitage.' Having said
this, the blameless lady of beautiful glances approached Yudhishthira
the just, taking the flower. And knowing the desire of his beloved queen
that bull among men, Bhima of great strength, also set out, in order to
gratify her. And intent upon fetching the flowers, he began to proceed
at rapid space, facing the wind, in the direction from which the flower
had come. And taking the bow inlaid with gold on the back as also arrows
like unto venomous snakes, he proceeded as a lion in anger or an
elephant in rut. And all beings gazed at him, holding a mighty bow and
arrows. And neither exhaustion, nor langour, neither fear nor confusion,
ever possessed the son of Pritha and the offspring of Vayu (wind). And
desirous of pleasing Draupadi the mighty one, free from fear or
confusion, ascended the peak depending on the strength of his arms. And
that slayer of foes began to range that beautiful peak covered with
trees, creepers and of black rocky base; and frequented by Kinnaras; and
variegated with minerals, plants, beasts, and birds of various hues; and
appearing like an upraised arm of the Earth adorned with an entire set
of ornaments. And that one of matchless prowess proceeded, fixing his
look at the slopes of the Gandhamadana,--beautiful with flowers of every
season--and revolving various thoughts in his mind and with his ears,
eyes and mind rivetted to the spots resounding with the notes of male
_kokilas_ and ringing with the hum of black bees. And like an elephant
in rut ranging mad in a forest that one of mighty prowess smelt the rare
odour proceeding from the flowers of every season. And he was fanned by
the fresh breeze of the Gandhamadana bearing the perfumes of various
blossoms and cooling like unto a father's touch. On his fatigue being
removed the down on his body stood on end. And in this state that
represser of foes for the flowers began to survey all the mountain,
inhabited by Yakshas and Gandharvas and celestials and Brahmarshis. And
brushed by the leaves of _Saptachchada_ tree, besmeared with fresh red,
black and white minerals, he looked as if decorated with lines of holy
unguents drawn by fingers. And with clouds stretching at its sides, the
mountain seemed dancing with outspread wings. And on account of the
trickling waters of springs, it appeared to be decked with necklaces of
pearls. And it contained romantic caverns and groves and cascades and
caves. And there were excellent peacocks dancing to the jingling of the
bangles of the Apsaras. And its rocky surface was worn away by the end
of tusks of the elephants presiding over the cardinal points. And with
the waters of rivers falling down, the mountain looked as if its clothes
were getting loosened. And that graceful son of the wind-god playfully
and cheerfully went on, pushing away by his force countless intertwisted
creepers. And stags in curiosity gazed at him, with grass in their
mouths. And not having experienced fear (ever before), they were
unalarmed, and did not flee away. And being engaged in fulfilling the
desire of his love, the youthful son of Pandu, stalwart and of splendour
like unto the hue of gold; and having a body strong as a lion; and
treading like a mad elephant; and possessing the force of a mad
elephant; and having coppery eyes like unto those of a mad elephant; and
capable of checking a mad elephant began to range the romantic sides of
the Gandhamadana with his beautiful eyes uplifted; and displaying as it
were a novel type of beauty. And the wives of Yakshas and Gandharvas
sitting invisible by the side of their husbands, stared at him, turning
their faces with various motions. Intent upon gratifying Draupadi exiled
unto the woods, as he was ranging the beautiful Gandhamadana, he
remembered the many and various woes caused by Duryodhana. And he
thought, 'Now that Arjuna sojourn in heaven and that I too have come
away to procure the flowers, what will our brother Yudhishthira do at
present? Surely, from affection and doubting their prowess, that
foremost of men, Yudhishthira, will not let Nakula and Sahadeva come in
search of us. How, again, can I obtain the flowers soon?' Thinking thus,
that tiger among men proceeded in amain like unto the king of birds, his
mind and sight fixed on the delightful side of the mountain. And having
for his provisions on the journey the words of Draupadi, the mighty son
of Pandu, Vrikodara Bhima, endued with strength and the swiftness of the
wind, with his mind and sight fixed on the blooming slopes of the
mountain, proceeded speedily, making the earth tremble with his tread,
even as doth a hurricane at the equinox; and frightening herds of
elephants and grinding lions and tigers and deer and uprooting and
smashing large trees and tearing away by force plants and creepers, like
unto an elephant ascending higher and higher the summit of a mountain;
and roaring fiercely even as a cloud attended with thunder. And awakened
by that mighty roaring of Bhima, tigers came out of their dens, while
other rangers of the forest hid themselves. And the coursers of the
skies sprang up (on their wing) in fright. And herds of deer hurriedly
ran away. And birds left the trees (and fled). And lions forsook their
dens. And the mighty lions were roused from their slumber. And the
buffaloes stared. And the elephants in fright, leaving that wood, ran to
more extensive forests company with their mates. And the boars and the
deer and the lions and the buffaloes and the tigers and the jackals and
the _gavayas_ of the wood began to cry in herds.

(Paragraph continued in next e-book.)





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Mahabharata of Krishna-Dwaipayana
Vyasa Bk. 3 Pt. 1, by Krishna-Dwaipayana Vyasa

