affecting us, are inseparably welded together. There can be no
presence with us, man by man, through all the ages, and in every land,
unless He, whose presence it is, participates in the absolute glory of
divinity. For to be with you and me and all our suffering brethren,
through the centuries and over the world, involves something more than
belongs to mere humanity. Therefore, the two sources of gladness are
confluent--Christ's ascension as affecting us is inseparably woven in
with Christ's ascension as affecting Himself.

Love will delight to dwell upon that thought of its exalted Lover. We
may fairly apply the simplicity of human relationships and affections
to the elucidation of what ought to be our affection to Him, our Lord.
And surely if our dearest one were far away from us, in some lofty
position, our hearts and our thoughts would ever be going thither, and
we should live more there than here, where we are 'cribbed, cabined,
and confined.' And if we love Jesus Christ with any depth of
earnestness and fervour of affection, there will be no thought more
sweet to us, and none which will more naturally flow into our hearts,
whenever they are for a moment at leisure, than this, the thought of
Him, our Brother and Forerunner, who has ascended up on high; and in
the midst of the glory of the throne bears us in His heart, and uses
His glory for our blessing. Love will spring to where the beloved is;
and if we be Christians in any deep and real sense, our hearts will
have risen with Christ, and we shall be sitting with Him at the right
hand of God. My brother, measure your Christianity, and the reality of
your love to Jesus Christ, by this--is it to you natural, and a joy,
to turn to Him, and ever to make present to your mind the glories in
which He loves and lives, and intercedes, and reigns, for you? 'If ye
love Me, ye will rejoice, because I go unto the Father.'

II. And now I can deal with the second verse of our text very briefly.
For our purpose it is less important than the former one. In it we
find our Lord setting forth, secondly, His departure and His
announcement of His departure as the ground and food of faith.

He knew what a crash was coming, and with exquisite tenderness,
gentleness, knowledge of their necessities, and suppression of all His
own feelings and emotions, He gave Himself to prepare the disciples
for the storm, that, forewarned, they might be forearmed, and that
when it did burst upon them, it might not take them by surprise.

So He does still, about a great many other things, and tells us
beforehand of what is sure to come to us, that when we are caught in
the midst of the tempest we may not bate one jot of heart or hope.

  Why should I complain
  Of want or distress,
  Temptation or pain?
  He told me no less.'

And when my sorrows come to me, I may say about them what He says
about His departure--He has told us before, that when it comes we may
believe.

But note how, in these final words of my text, Christ avows that the
great aim of His utterances and of His departure is to evoke our
faith. And what does He mean by faith? He means, first of all, a grasp
of the historic facts--His death, His resurrection, His ascension. He
means, next, the understanding of these as He Himself has explained
them--a death of sacrifice, a resurrection of victory over death and
the grave, and an ascension to rule and guide His Church and the
world, and to send His divine Spirit into men's hearts if they will
receive it. And He means, therefore, as the essence of the faith that
He would produce in all our hearts--a reliance upon Himself as thus
revealed, Sacrifice by His death, Victor by His resurrection, King and
interceding Priest by His ascension--a reliance upon Himself as
absolute as the facts are sure, as unfaltering as is His eternal
sameness. The faith that grasps the Christ, dead, risen, ascended, as
its all in all, for time and for eternity, is the faith which by all
His work, and by all His words about His work, He desires to kindle in
our hearts. Has He kindled it in yours?

Then there is a second thought--viz., that these facts, as interpreted
by Himself, are the ground and the nourishment of our faith. How
differently they looked when seen from the further side and when seen
from the hither side! Anticipated and dimly anticipated, they were all
doleful and full of dismay; remembered and looked back upon, they were
radiant and bright. The disciples felt, with shrinking hearts and
fainting spirits, that their whole reliance upon Jesus Christ was on
the point of being shattered, and that everything was going when He
died. 'We _trusted_,' said two of them, with such a sad use of the
past tense, 'we _trusted_ that this _had been_ He which should have
redeemed Israel. But we do not trust it any more, nor do we expect Him
to be Israel's Redeemer now.' But after the facts were all unveiled,
there came back the memory of His words, and they said to one another,
'Did He not tell us that it was all to be so? How blind we were not to
understand Him!'

And so 'the Cross, the grave, the skies,' are the foundations of our
faith; and they who see Him dying, rising, ascended, henceforth will
find it impossible to doubt. Feed your faith upon these great facts,
and take Christ's own explanation of them, and your faith will be
strong.

Again, we learn here that faith is the condition of the true presence
of our absent Lord. Faith is that on our side which corresponds to His
spiritual coming to us. Whosoever trusts Him possesses Him, and He is
with and in every soul that, loving Him, relies upon Him, in a
closeness so close and a presence so real that heaven itself does not
bring the spirit of the believer and the Spirit of the Lord nearer one
another, though it takes away the bodily film that sometimes seems to
part their lives.

We, too, may and should be glad when we lift our eyes to that Throne
where our Brother reigns. We too, may be glad that He is there,
because His being there is the reason why He can be here; and we, too,
may feed our faith upon Him, and so bring Him in very deed to dwell in
our hearts. If we would have Christ within us, let us trust Him dying,
rising, living in the heavens; and then we shall learn how, by all
three apparent departures, He is drawing the closer to the souls that
love and trust.




CHRIST FORESEEING HIS PASSION

'Hereafter I will not talk much with you: for the Prince of this world
cometh, and hath nothing in Me. But that the world may know that I
love the Father; and as the Father gave Me commandment, even so I do.
Arise, Let us go hence.'--JOHN xiv. 30,31.

The summons to departure which closes these verses shows that we have
now reached the end of that sacred hour in the upper room. In
obedience to the summons, we have to fancy the little group leaving
its safe shelter, as sailors might put out from behind a breakwater
into a stormy sea. They pass from its seclusion and peace into the
joyous stir of the crowded streets, filled with feast-keeping
multitudes, on whom the full paschal moon looked down, pure and
calming. Somewhere between the upper chamber and the crossing of the
brook Kedron, the divine words of the following chapters were spoken,
but this discourse, closely connected as it is with them, reaches its
fitting close in these penetrating, solemn words of outlook into the
near future, so calm, so weighty, so resolute, so almost triumphant,
with which Christ seeks finally to impart to His timorous friends some
of His own peace and assurance of victory.

They lead us into a region seldom opened to our view, and never to be
looked upon but with reverent awe. For they tell us what Christ
thought about His sufferings, and how He felt as He went down to that
cold, black river, in which He was to be baptized. 'Put off thy shoes
from off thy feet, for the place where thou standest is holy ground.'
So, reverently listening to the words, sacred because of the Speaker,
the theme, and the circumstances, we note in them these things: His
calm anticipation of the assailant, His unveiling of the secret and
motive of His apparent defeat, and His resolute advance to the
conflict. Let us look at these three points.

I. First, we have here our Lord's calm anticipation of the assailant.

'Hereafter I will not talk much with you: for the Prince of this world
cometh, and hath nothing in Me.' One of the other Gospels tells us, in
finishing its account of our Lord's temptation in the wilderness, that
when Satan had ended all these temptations 'he departed from Him for a
season.' And now we have the second and the intenser form of that
assault. The first was addressed to desires, and sought to stimulate
ambition and ostentation and the animal appetites, and so, through the
cravings of human nature, to shake the Master's fixed faith. The
second used sharper and more fatal weapons, and appealed, not to
desire of enjoyment, or ease, or good, but to the natural human
shrinking from pain and suffering and shame and death. He that was
impervious on the side of natural necessities and more subtle
spiritual desires might yet be reached through terror. And so the
second form of the assault, instead of tempting the traveller by the
sunshine to cast aside his cloak, tempted him by storm and tempest to
fling it aside; and the one, as the other, was doomed to failure.

Note how the Master, with that clear eye which saw to the depths as
well as the heights, and before which men and things were but, as it
were, transparent media through which unseen spiritual powers wrought,
just as He discerns the Father's will as supreme and sovereign, sees
here--beneath Judas's treachery, and Pharisees' and priests' envy, and
the people's stolid indifference, and the Roman soldiers' impartial
scorn--the workings of a personal source and centre of all. The
'Prince of this world,' who rules men and things when they are severed
from God, 'cometh.' Christ's sensitive nature apprehends the approach
of the evil thing, as some organisations can tell when a thunderstorm
is about to burst. His divine Omniscience, working as it did, even
within the limits of humanity, knows not only when the storm is about
to burst upon Him, but knows who it is that has raised the tempest.
And so He says, 'The Prince of this world cometh.'

But note, as yet more important, that tremendous and unique
consciousness of absolute invulnerability against the assaults. 'He
hath nothing in Me.' He is 'the Prince of the world,' but His dominion
stops outside My breast. He has no rule or authority there. His writs
do not run, nor is His dominion recognised, within that sacred realm.

Was there ever a man who could say that? Are there any of us, the
purest and the noblest, who, standing single-handed in front of the
antagonistic power of evil, and believing it to be consolidated and
consecrated in a person, dare to profess that there is not a thing in
us on which he can lay his black claw and say--'That is mine?' Is
there nothing inflammable within us which the 'fiery darts of the
wicked' can kindle? Are there any of us who bar our doors so tightly
as that we can say that none of his seductions will find their way
therein, and that nothing there will respond to them? Christ sets
Himself here against the whole embattled and embodied power of evil,
and puts Himself in contrast to the universal human experience, when
He calmly declares 'He hath nothing in Me.' It is an assertion of His
absolute freedom from sinfulness, and it involves, as I take it, the
other assertion--that as He is free from sin, so He is not subject to
that consequence of sin, which is death, as we know it. Another part
of Scripture speaks to us in strange language, which yet has in it a
deep truth, of 'him that had the power of death, that is, the devil.'
Men fall under the rightful dominion of the king of evil when they
sin, and part of the proof of his dominion is the fact of physical
death, with its present accompaniments. Thus, in His calm
anticipation, Jesus stands waiting for the enemy's charge, knowing
that all its forces will be broken against the serried ranks of His
immaculate purity, and that He will come from the dreadful close
unwounded all, and triumphant for evermore.

But do not let us suppose that because Christ, in His anticipation of
suffering and death, knew Himself invulnerable, with not even a spot
on His heel into which the arrow could go, therefore the conflict was
an unreal or shadowy one. It was a true fight, and it was a real
struggle that He was anticipating, thus calmly in these solemn words,
as knowing Himself the Victor ere He entered on the dreadful field.

II. So note, secondly, in these words, our Lord's unveiling of the
motive and aim of His apparent defeat.

'But that the world might know that I love the Father, and, as the
Father gave Me commandment, even so I do.' There may be some
uncertainty about the exact grammatical relation of these clauses to
one another, with which I need not trouble you, because it does not
affect their substantial meaning. However we solve the mere
grammatical questions, the fundamental significance of the whole
remains unaffected, and it is this: that Christ's sufferings and death
were, in one aspect, for the purpose that the world might know His
love to the Father, and, in another aspect, were obedience to the
Father's commandment. And if we consider these two aspects, I think we
shall get some thoughts worth considering as to the way in which the
Master Himself looks upon these sufferings and that death.

The first point I note in this division of my discourse is that Christ
would have us regard His sufferings and His death as His own act. Note
that remarkable phrase, 'thus I _do_.' A strange word to be used in
such a connection, but full of profound meaning. We speak, and
rightly, of the solemn events of these coming days as the passion of
our Lord, but they were His action quite as much as His passion. He
was no mere passive sufferer. In them all He acted, or, as He says
here, we may look upon them all, not as things inflicted upon Him from
without by any power, however it might seem to have the absolute
control of His fate, but as things which He did Himself.

There is one Man who died, not of physical necessity, but because of
free choice. There is one Man who chose to be born, and who chose to
die; who, in His choosing to be born, chose humiliation, and who, in
choosing to die, chose yet deeper humiliation. This sacrifice was a
voluntary sacrifice, or, to speak more accurately, He was both Priest
and Sacrifice, when 'through the Eternal Spirit He offered Himself
without spot unto God.' The living Christ is the Lord of Life, and
lives because He will; the dying Christ is the Lord of Death, and dies
because He chose. He would have us learn that all His bitter
sufferings, inflicted from without as they were, and traceable to a
deeper source than merely human antagonism, were also self-inflicted
and self-chosen, and further traceable to the Father's will in harmony
with His own. 'Thus I do,' and thus He did when He died.

Then, further, our Lord would have us regard these sufferings and that
death as being His crowning act of obedience to His Father's will.
That is in accordance with the whole tone of His self-consciousness,
especially as set before us in this precious Gospel of John, which
traces up everything to the submission of the divine Son to the divine
Father, a submission which is no mere external act, but results from,
and is the expression of, the absolute unity of will and the perfect
oneness of mutual love. And so, because He loved the Father, therefore
He came to do the Father's will, and the crowning act of His obedience
was this, that He was 'obedient unto death, even the death of the
Cross.' It was a voluntary sacrifice, but that voluntariness was not
self-will. It was a sacrifice in obedience to the Father's will, but
that obedience was not reluctant. Christ was the embodiment of the
divine purpose, formed before the ages and realised in time, when He
bowed His head and yielded up the ghost. The highest proof of His
filial obedience was the Cross. And to it He points us, if we would
know what it is to love and obey the Father.

Now it is to be noticed that this motive of our Lord's death is not
the usual one given in Scripture. And I can suppose the question being
put, 'Why did not Jesus Christ say, in that supreme moment, that He
went to the Cross because of His love to us rather than because of His
love to the Father?' But I think the answer is not far to seek. There
are several satisfactory ones which may be given. One is that this
making prominent of His love to God rather than to us, as the motive
for His death, is in accordance with that comparative reticence on the
part of Jesus as to the atoning aspect of His death, which I have had
frequent occasion to point out, and which does not carry in it the
implication that that doctrine was a new thing in the Christian
preaching after Pentecost. Another reason may be drawn from the whole
strain and tone of this chapter, which, as I have already said, traces
up everything to the loving relations of obedience between the Father
and Son. And yet another reason may be given in that the very
statement of Christ's love to God, and loving obedience to the
Father's commandment as the motive of His death, includes in it
necessarily the other thing--love to us. For what was the Father's
commandment which Christ with all His heart accepted, and with His
glad will obeyed unto death? It was that the Son should come as the
Ransom for the world. The Son of man was sent, 'not to be ministered
unto, but to minister, and to give His life a Ransom for many.' Or, as
He Himself said, in one of His earliest discourses, 'God so loved the
world that He gave His only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in
Him should not perish.' And for what He gave that Son is clearly
stated in the context itself of that passage--'As Moses lifted up the
serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of Man be lifted up.'

To speak of Christ's acceptance of the Father's commandment, then, is
but another way of saying that Christ, in all the fullness of His
self-surrender, entered into and took as His own the great, eternal
divine purpose, that the world should be redeemed by His death upon
the Cross. The heavenward side of His love to man is His love to the
Father, God.

Now there is another aspect still in which our Lord would here have us
regard His sufferings and death, and that is that they are of
worldwide significance.

Think for a moment of the obscurity of the speaker, a Jewish peasant
in an upper room, with a handful of poor men around Him, all of them
ready to forsake Him, within a few hours of His ignominious death; and
yet He says, 'I am about to die, that the echo of it may reverberate
through the whole world.' He puts Himself forth as of worldwide
significance, and His death as adapted to move mankind, and as one day
to be known all over the world. There is nothing in history to
approach to the gigantic arrogance of Jesus Christ, and it is only
explicable on the ground of His divinity.

'This I do that _the world_ may know.' And what did it matter to the
world? Why should it be of any importance that the world should know?
For one plain reason, because true knowledge of the true nature and
motive of that death breaks the dominion of the Prince of this world,
and sets men free from his tyranny. Emancipation, hope, victory,
purity, the passing from the tyranny of the darkness into the blessed
kingdom of the light--all depend on the world's knowing that Christ's
death was His own voluntary act of submission to the infinite love and
will of the Father, which will and love He made His own, and therefore
died, the sacrifice for the world's sin.

The enemy was approaching. He was to be hoist with his own petard. 'He
digged a pit; he digged it deep,' and into the pit which he had digged
he himself fell. 'Oh, death! I will be thy plague' by entering into
thy realm. 'Oh, grave! I will be thy destruction' by dwelling for a
moment within thy dark portals and rending them irreparably as I pass
from them. The Prince of this world was defeated when he seemed to
triumph, and Christ's mighty words came true: 'Now shall the Prince of
this world be cast out.' He would have the world know--with the
knowledge which is of the heart as well as the head, which is life as
well as understanding, which is possession and appropriation--the
mystery, the meaning, the motive of His death, because the world
thereby ceases to be a world, and becomes the kingdom of Jesus Christ.

III. Lastly, notice here the resolute advance to the conflict.

'Arise, let us go hence'--a word of swift alacrity. Evidently He rose
to His feet whilst they lay round the table. He bids them rise with
Him and follow Him on the path.

But there is more in the words than the mere close of a conversation,
and a summons to change of place. They indicate a kind of divine
impatience to be in the fight, and to have it over. The same emotion
is plainly revealed in the whole of the latter days of our Lord's
life. You remember how His disciples followed amazed, as He strode up
the road from Jericho, hastening to His Cross. You remember His
deliberate purpose to draw upon Himself public notice during that
dangerous and explosive week before the Passover, as shown in the
publicity of His entry into Jerusalem, His sharp rebukes of the rulers
in the Temple, and in every other incident of those days. You remember
His words to the betrayer: 'That thou doest, do quickly.' These latter
hours of the Lord were strongly marked by the emotion to which He gave
utterance in His earlier words: 'I have a baptism to be baptized with,
and how am I straitened till it be accomplished!' Perhaps that feeling
indicated His human shrinking; for we all know how we sometimes are
glad to precipitate an unwelcome thing, and how the more we dread it,
the more we are anxious to get it over. But there is far more than
that in it. There is the resolved determination to carry out the
Father's purpose for the world's salvation, which was His own purpose,
and was none the less His though He knew all the suffering which it
involved.

Let us adore the steadfast will, which never faltered, though the
natural human weakness was there too, and which, as impelled by some
strong spring, kept persistently pressing towards the Cross that on it
He might die, the world's Redeemer.

And do not let us forget that He summoned His lovers and disciples to
follow Him on the road. 'Let us go hence.' It is ours to take up our
cross daily and follow the Master, to do with persistent resolve our
duty, whether it be welcome or unwelcome, and to see to it that we
plant no faltering and reluctant foot in our Master's footsteps. For
us, too, if we have learned to flee to the Cross for our redemption
and salvation, the resolve of our Redeemer and the very passion of the
Saviour itself become the pattern and law of our lives. We, too, have
to cast ourselves into the fight, and to take up our cross, 'that the
world may know that we love the Father, and as the Father hath given
us commandment.' And if we so live, then our death, too, in some
humble measure, may be like His--the crowning act of obedience to the
Father's will; in which we are neither passively nor resistingly
dragged under by a force that we cannot effectually resist, but in
which we go down willingly into the dark valley where death 'makes our
sacrifice complete.'










End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Expositions of Holy Scriptures, by 
Alexander Maclaren

