
How had he made his money?  He had made it in a way that is considered
the most honest and upright that is possible.  He had made his money
farming.  Listen: "The ground of a certain rich man brought forth
plentifully."  The ground.  It smacks of cleanliness, honesty,
uprightness.

"The ground of a certain rich man brought forth plentifully."  And when
I read that I am back on the old farm again.  As I read it there comes
before me a vision of my boyhood's home.  I see the old white house
under the hill.  I see the sturdy apple trees in front of it and the
forest of beech, oak and chestnut stretching away in the distance back
of it.  I can hear the lowing of the cattle and the neighing of the
horses and the crowing of the cock in the barnyard.  I can hear the
call of the bob white to his mate, and the song of the catbird in the
thicket at the end of the row.  I can feel the caress of the fresh
upturned sod upon my bare feet.  I can catch the fragrance of the new
mown hay.  I can see myself coming home in the gloaming "as the day
fades into golden and then into gray and then into deep blue of the
night sky with its myriad of stars that blossom at twilight's early
hour like lilies on the tomb of day."  And when I come home I come to a
night of restful sleep because I have come from a clean day's work.
No, this man was not a fool because he had gotten his money
dishonestly.  He had made it honestly, every dollar of it.

Nor was he a fool because he set about thoughtfully to save what he had
made.  The Bible sets no premium upon wastefulness.  God lets us know
that to waste anything of value is not only foolish but wicked.  What
was the sin of the Prodigal Son?  It was this, that he "wasted his
substance with riotous living."  He spent his treasure without getting
any adequate return.

That is the tragedy of a great number of us.  I do not charge you with
outrageous and disgraceful wickedness.  But it is true that you are not
investing your life in the highest possible way.  You are squandering
yourself on things of secondary value.  And to you God is speaking as
he spoke centuries ago: "Wherefore do you spend your money for that
which is not meat and your labor for that which satisfieth not?"  You
have no right to waste yourself and you have just as little right to
waste your money which represents a part of yourself.

No, the foolishness of this man was not in the fact that he sought to
save what he had made.  That is right.  That is sensible.  To do
otherwise is at once wicked and little.  Big things do not waste.  This
is a big world on which we live but it has never lost one single drop
of water nor one single grain of sand since God flung it into space.
And even Jesus Christ himself, the Lord of the universe, commanded His
disciples after He had fed the multitude, to gather up the fragments
that nothing be lost.

Why then, I repeat, does Christ call this man a fool?  His foolishness
lay fundamentally in the fact that he was a practical atheist.  He had
absolutely no sense of God.  He lived as if the fact of God were an
absolute lie.  I do not think for a moment that he claimed to be an
atheist.  I have no doubt that he was altogether orthodox.  I have no
doubt that he went to the synagogue or to the temple every Sabbath day.
But practically he was an utter atheist.  And what is true of him is
equally true of many another man who stands up every Sunday in Church
to recite his creed.

How do we know that he is an atheist?  We know it by hearing him think.
Listen: "He thought within himself."  Now then we are going to get to
see this man as he really is.  You can't always tell what a man is by
the way he looks.  He may look like the flower, but be the serpent
under it.  He may smile and smile, as Hamlet tells us, and be a
villain.  You can't always tell what he is by what he says.  He may
speak high sentiments to which his heart is a stranger.  Nor can you
tell him by what he does.  He may "do his alms" simply to be seen of
men.  But if you can get in behind the scenes and see him think, then
you will know him.  Tell me, man, what you think within yourself and I
will tell you what you are.  For, "As a man thinketh in his heart, so
is he."

Now, what did this man think?  "He thought within himself, saying, What
shall _I_ do for _I_ have no room where to bestow _My_ goods and _My_
fruits?  And he said, This will _I_ do.  _I_ will pull down _My_ barns
and build greater, and there will _I_ bestow all _My_ goods and _My_
fruits."  Now we see him.  When he thought, he had not one single
thought of God.  God was as completely ignored as if He had no
existence at all.  This was the very fountain source of his
foolishness.  He reckoned without God, and the man who reckons without
God is a fool.

Look now how this fatal foolishness casts its blight over his entire
character.  Reckoning without God, of course, he has no sense of Divine
ownership.  Quite naturally, therefore, he thinks because he possesses
a farm, he owns a farm.  Possession and ownership mean exactly the same
thing to a man who begins by ignoring God.  When you hear this man talk
you find that the only pronouns he has in his vocabulary are "I," "My"
and "Mine."  He knows only the grammar of atheism.  He is acquainted
only with the vocabulary of the fool.  "His" and "Ours" and "Yours" are
not found in the fool's vocabulary.

Faith, on the other hand, makes large use of the word "His."  It
recognizes the fact that "the earth is the Lord's and the fullness
thereof."  It believes in the big truth: "Ye are not your own.  You are
bought with a price."  Faith, taking God into consideration, wisely
reckons that you are His and that all that you possess is His.  It does
not concede to you the ownership of anything.  And for any man anywhere
to-day to claim that because he possesses a farm or a bank or a brain,
that, therefore, he owns it is to talk not the language of a wise man
but the language of a fool.

This farmer's reckoning without God not only led him to confuse
possession and ownership.  It also robbed him of his gratitude.  Crops
were abundant.  The farmer has prospered wonderfully.  But leaving God
out of his thinking there is no one for this farmer to thank for his
success but himself.  He never thought of taking hold of his sluggish
soul and shaking it into wakefulness with this wise word, "Bless the
Lord, O my soul, and forget not all His benefits."  He did not concede
the Lord any part in it.

There are many men just like him to-day.  I was pastor in a small town
some years ago.  There was in that town only one rich man.  He had made
the money that he possessed, and they called him a self-made man.  One
day a certain preacher, not myself, went to him to ask him for a
donation for some charity.  He began by reminding this man of wealth
how the Lord had blessed him.  And what was the reply?  It was about
the meanest I ever heard.  He said, "I know the Lord has blessed me,
but I was there."

"I was there."  And what he meant by that was that in reality the Lord
had had nothing to do with it.  "I did it all myself.  In fact, if the
Lord hadn't made the world I would.  So there is not a thing for which
I ought to be thankful."  Now, the man who has no gratitude is a fool.
He is a fool because the right sort of thinking always leads to
thanking.  The only kind of thinking that does not do so is the
thinking of the practical atheist, and the practical atheist is a fool.

Then this farmer had no sense of obligation.  This, too, is a natural
outcome of his reckoning without God.  Here is a man who is looking out
on this same world upon which the farmer is looking, and he says, "I am
a debtor both to the Greek and to the barbarian, both to the wise and
to the unwise."  The reason Paul says that is because he believes in
God.  God has blessed him and saved him with a wonderful salvation.
Because of that fact he feels himself under infinite obligation to
preach the Gospel that has saved himself.  But this man, this fool, has
only himself to thank for his prosperity.  Therefore he has a right to
use his wealth as he pleases.  The man who has no sense of obligation,
the man who tells you that he has a right to do as he pleases with his
possessions is proclaiming to you not a new rule of ethics.  He is
simply telling you in unmistakable language that he is a fool.

This man showed himself a fool, last of all, by the confidence that he
placed in things.  Ignoring God he sought to find a substitute for God
in abundant crops.  He undertook to treat his soul as he would treat
his sheep and his goats.  Here he was, an immortal man.  Here he was,
destined to live when this old world has been a wreck for billions of
years.  And what provision does he make for himself?  The same that he
makes for his horses and his oxen and his asses.  Of course, as one has
pointed out, it was not foolish for him to make some provision for the
few years he might live here.  He was a fool for refusing to make
provision for the eternity that he must live.

"Soul, thou hast much goods laid up for many days.  Eat, drink and be
merry."  Did ever you hear words that were more stamped with moral
idiocy?  You can see from them that his soul has not fared well up to
this time.  You can easily tell from these words that his moral nature
has been starved and stunted.  We can easily tell that all his gettings
have not satisfied him in the past.  And yet he is vainly expecting
satisfaction in the future.  Now it is obvious that the man who forgets
God, who turns aside to the worship of things, plays the fool.

So you see why the Master calls this shrewd farmer a fool.  He began by
reckoning without God.  He virtually said in his heart, "There is no
God."  He went wrong in the very center of his nature.  This put the
blight of moral imbecility on his whole life.  He turned to his
possessions and sought to satisfy his soul with them.  He received them
without gratitude and held them without any sense of obligation, for he
thought to possess was to own.

Now the Master, lest we should pull our skirts about us and thank God
that we are not as this man, forces the truth home upon our own hearts.
"So," He says, "is he that layeth up treasure for himself and is not
rich toward God."  That is, just the same kind of fool and just as big
a fool is that man to-day who reckons without God and lives only for
himself.  If you are living your life in selfishness, however
respectable that selfishness may be, you are just the same kind of fool
and just as great a fool as is this rich man of the story.

Now the tragedy of this story, I take it, is that the foolishness of
this farmer was self-chosen.  His riches might have been a blessing to
him here and a blessing through all eternity.  In spite of the fact
that he was rich in this world's goods he might also have been, in the
truest sense, rich toward God.  In fact, he might have been richer
toward God with his wealth than without it.  With it he might have
exercised a far larger usefulness than he could have done without it.
But he chose to ignore God and to rob himself and thus brand himself a
fool now and evermore.

Don't forget that you and I may make the same tragic wreck of our
lives.  The only way to avoid doing so is to go right where this man
went wrong.  There is a sure road to spiritual enrichment.  "Though he
were rich, yet for our sakes he became poor that we, through his
poverty, might be rich."  This wealth is no fabled bag of gold at the
end of the rainbow.  I can so direct you to this treasure that you will
be sure to find it.  This is the road: "Yield yourselves unto God."
That is your first duty.  That is your highest wisdom.  Recognize God
as owner of yourself.  Recognize God as the owner of all that you have.
Give all to Him and He will give all to you.  "For He that spared not
His own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall He not with him
also freely give us all things."  To have that treasure is to be rich
forever more.  To be thus rich is to be eternally wise.




THE END











End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Sermons on Biblical Characters, by 
Clovis G. Chappell

