* * *

For as the body is one, and hath many members, and all the members of
that one body, being many, are one body, so also is Christ.


For as the body is composed of many sects and parties who are opposed
to each other, and have no gifts, and being many sects, are but one
body, so also is Antichrist.

* * *

For by one Spirit are we all baptized into one body, whether we be
Jews or Gentiles, whether we be bond or free; and have been all made
to drink into one Spirit.


For by many spirits are we all baptized into many bodies, whether we
be Catholics or Protestants, Presbyterians or Methodists, but have all
drunk into one spirit, even the spirit of the world.

* * *

For the body is not one member, but many.


For the body is not one sect, but many.

* * *

But now hath God set the members every one of them in the body, as it
hath pleased Him.


But now hath the God (of this world) set the sects and parties in the
body (of Antichrist) as it hath pleased him.

* * *

And if they were all one member, where were the body?


And if they were all one sect, where were the body?

* * *

But now are they many members, but one body.


But now are they many sects, yet but one body (even Babylon).

* * *

Now ye are the body of Christ, and members in particular.


Now ye are the body of Antichrist, and members in particular.

* * *

And God hath set some in the Church: first, Apostles; secondly,
Prophets; thirdly, Teachers; after that, miracles; then, gifts of
healings, helps, governments, diversities of tongues.


And man hath set some in the church, first, a hireling priest;
secondly, a board of officers; thirdly, tracts; then commentaries,
creeds, and diversities of opinions; hence, societies and wondrous
helps.

* * *

Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and
shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake:
rejoice, and be exceeding glad; for great is your reward in heaven;
for so persecuted they the Prophets which were before you.


Woe unto you, when men revile you, and persecute you, and say all
manner of evil against you falsely for Christ's sake. Lament ye, and
be exceedingly sorrowful in that hour, for little is your reward among
men, for so persecute they the Latter-day Saints.

* * *

Give to him that asketh thee; and from him that would borrow of thee
turn thou not away.


Give to him that asketh of thee, if he be able to make thee a similar
present; and from him that would borrow of thee turn not thou away, if
he be able to pay thee again with good interest.

* * *

Be ye therefore perfect even as your Father who is in heaven is
perfect.


Do not think to be perfect, for it is impossible to live without sin.

* * *

Take heed that you do not your alms before men, to be seen of them;
otherwise ye have no reward of your Father who is in heaven.


Take heed that you do your alms before men, to be seen of them;
otherwise, you have no reward nor praise from the children of men.

* * *

Therefore, when thou doest thine alms, do not sound a trumpet before
thee, as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets, that
they may have glory of men. Verily I say unto you, They have their
reward.


Therefore when thou doest thine alms, publish it in the Missionary
Herald, or some other paper, that you may get praise of the world.
Verily I say unto you, You shall have your reward.

* * *

And when thou prayest, thou shalt not be as the hypocrites are; for
they love to pray standing in the synagogues and in the corners of the
streets, that they may be seen of men.


And when thou prayest, be like the hypocrites in days of old; go
before the public and cry mightily, not expecting to be heard and
answered, for that would be miraculous, and miracles have ceased.

* * *

Moreover, when ye fast, be not, as the hypocrites, of a sad
countenance: for they disfigure their faces, that they may appear unto
men to fast. Verily I say unto you, They have their reward.


Moreover, when ye fast, be like the hypocrites, of a sad countenance,
that ye may appear unto men to fast; so that you may get your reward.

* * *

Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth and rust
doth corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal: but lay up
for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust doth
corrupt, and where thieves do not break through nor steal; for where
your treasure is, there will your heart be also.


Lay up for yourselves abundance of treasures on the earth, where moth
and rust doth corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal; for
if your heart is only in heaven, it is no matter how rich you are in
this world; for now it is come to pass that ye can serve God and
mammon.

* * *

Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do
ye even so to them: for this is the law and the Prophets.


Therefore all things whatsoever men do to you, do ye even so to them;
for this is the law and the practice.

* * *

Enter ye in at the straight gate; for wide is the gate, and broad is
the way, that leadeth to destruction, and many there be which go in
thereat.


Enter ye in at the wide gate, where the multitude go: for it cannot be
that all our great and learned men are wrong, and nobody right but a
few obscure individuals.

* * *

Because straight is the gate, and narrow is the way, that leadeth unto
life, and few there be that find it.


For the narrow way is not altogether too straight, but only a very few
travel in it.

* * *

Beware of false prophets, which come to you in sheep's clothing, but
inwardly they are ravening wolves. Ye shall know them by their fruits.
Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles?


Beware of Prophets who come to you with the Word of God; you may know
at once they are false, without hearing them or examining their
fruits; popular opinion is against them; whereas, if they were men of
God, the people would speak well of them.

* * *

Wherefore, by their fruits ye shall know them. Not every one that
saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but
he that doeth the will of my Father who is in heaven.


If we are only sure that we have experienced religion, and we pray
often, we shall be saved, whether we do the Lord's will or not; for it
mattereth not what system we embrace, whether it be right or wrong, if
we are only sincere.

* * *

And it came to pass, when Jesus had ended these sayings, the people
were astonished at His doctrine: for He taught them as one having
authority, and not as the scribes.


And it came to pass, when men had ended these sayings, the people were
pleased with their doctrines, for they taught them not as men having
authority, but as the scribes.







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Voice of Warning, by Parley P. Pratt

