planning."--_Chicago Record._

"The scene is laid in England in the early days of the Restoration.
Charles II., Nell Gwynne, Pepys, and Milton are among the
characters."--_Buffalo Express._

"None of her books tells a more interesting story."--_St. Louis Star._

R. F. FENNO & COMPANY, New York




_Small 12mo, 75 cents._

THE STORY OF A GENIUS

_From the German of Ossip Schubin._


_The International_ in a recent issue had this to say concerning this
talented authoress: "'Ossip Schubin' is the pseudonym of Aloysia
Kirschmer, an Austrian authoress of growing popularity. She was born in
Prague, in June, 1854, and her early youth was spent on a country estate
of her parents. Since her eighteenth year she has travelled extensively,
spending her winters in some one of the large cities. Rome, Paris or
Brussels, and her work shows the keen observation and cool judgment of a
cosmopolitan writer. She is well liked in England." The story under
consideration is infinitely sad, beautiful, exalting. At one moment you
are rejoicing at the idyllic happiness of the lover, the bright promise
of a glorious future. Then the scene changes, and your heart is bleeding
with unutterable anguish at the mute grief that follows the irreparable
loss of his love, which carries in its train lost ambition, talent,
manhood. Just let us quote one passage: "There is a suffering so painful
that no hand is tender enough to touch it, and so deep that no heart is
brave enough to fathom it. Dumbly we sink the head, as before something
sacred. Never could he reproach her lying there before him, clad in the
blue dress, of which every fold, so dear to him, cried 'forgive!' Not to
our desecrated love do I appeal, but to our sweet caressing
friendship,--forgive the sister what the bride has done!' How could he
reproach her, with her parting kiss still on his lips?"

R. F. FENNO & COMPANY

9 and 11 EAST 16TH STREET, NEW YORK




_12mo, cloth, $1.25_

An Unofficial Patriot

By HELEN H. GARDENER


"It is a side of the slavery question of which Northern people knew
nothing."--_John A. Cockerill, N. Y. Advertiser._

"Strong and picturesque sketches of camp and field in the days of the
Civil War."--_San Francisco Chronicle._

"The book is being dramatized by Mr. James A. Herne, the well-known
actor, author and manager."--_N. Y. Press._

"It tells a splendid story."--_Journal, Columbus, O_

"Will be sure to attract the attention it deserves."--_Philadelphia
Press._

"In its scope and power it is unrivalled among war stories."--_Ideas,
Boston, Mass._

"In many ways the most remarkable historical novel of the Civil
War."--_Home Journal, Boston, Mass._

"The interview with Lincoln is one of the finest bits of dialogue in a
modern book."--_Chicago Herald._

"Will probably be the most popular and saleable novel since Robert
Elsmere."--_Republican._

"One of the most instructive and fascinating writers of our
time."--_Courier-Journal, Louisville._

"Is calculated to command as wide attention as Judge Tourgee's 'Fool's
Errand.'"--_N. Y. Evening Telegram._

"Has enriched American literature."--_Item, Philadelphia._

"Remarkably true to history."--_Inter-Ocean, Chicago_

"Entitled to a place with standard histories of the War."--_Atlanta
Journal._

NEW YORK: R. F. FENNO & COMPANY





End of Project Gutenberg's A Girl of the Commune, by George Alfred Henty

