"Mrs. Crawford," said Carl, re-entering his father's room, "Mr. Ashcroft
would like to have a few words with you. Can you come out?"

She followed Carl uneasily.

"What is it you want with me, sir?" she asked, frigidly.

"Let me introduce an old acquaintance of yours."

Mr. Cook, whom Mrs. Crawford had not at first observed, came forward.
She drew back in dismay.

"It is some time since we met, Lucy," said Cook, quietly.

"Do you come here to make trouble?" she muttered, hoarsely.

"I come to ask for the property you took during my absence in
California," he said. "I don't care to have you return to me----"

"I obtained a divorce."

"Precisely; I don't care to annul it. I am thankful that you are no
longer my wife."

"I--I will see what I can do for you. Don't go near my present husband.
He is in poor health, and cannot bear a shock."

"Mrs. Crawford," said Ashcroft, gravely, "if you have any idea of
remaining here, in this house, give it up. I shall see that your
husband's eyes are opened to your real character."

"Sir, you heard this man say that he has no claim upon me."

"That may be, but I cannot permit my friend to harbor a woman whose
record is as bad as yours."

"What do you mean?" she demanded, defiantly.

"I mean that you have served a term in prison for larceny."

"It is false," she said, with trembling lips.

"It is true. I visited the prison during your term of confinement, and
saw you there."

"I, too, can certify to it," said Cook. "I learned it two years after my
marriage. You will understand why I am glad of the divorce."

Mrs. Crawford was silent for a moment. She realized that the battle was
lost.

"Well," she said, after a pause, "I am defeated. I thought my secret was
safe, but I was mistaken. What do you propose to do with me?"

"I will tell you this evening," said Ashcroft. "One thing I can say
now--you must not expect to remain in this house."

"I no longer care to do so."

A conference was held during the afternoon, Dr Crawford being told as
much as was essential. It was arranged that Mrs. Crawford should have
an allowance of four hundred dollars for herself and Peter if she would
leave the house quietly, and never again annoy her husband. Mr. Cook
offered to take Peter, but the latter preferred to remain with his
mother. A private arrangement was made by which Dr. Crawford made up to
Mr. Cook one-half of the sum stolen from him by his wife, and through
the influence of Ashcroft, employment was found for him. He is no longer
a tramp, but a man held in respect, and moderately prosperous.

Carl is still in the employ of Mr. Jennings, and his father has removed
to Milford, where he and his son can live together. Next September, on
his twenty-first birthday, Carl will be admitted to a junior partnership
in the business, his father furnishing the necessary capital. Carl's
stepmother is in Chicago, and her allowance is paid to her quarterly
through a Chicago bank. She has considerable trouble with Peter, who
has become less submissive as he grows older, and is unwilling to settle
down to steady work. His prospects do not look very bright.

Mr. Jennings and Hannah are as much attached as ever to Carl, and it
is quite likely the manufacturer will make him his heir. Happy in the
society of his son, Dr. Crawford is likely to live to a good old age, in
spite of his weakness and tendency to heart disease, for happiness is a
great aid to longevity.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Driven From Home, by Horatio Alger

