pocketbook.

After some reflection, finding his nephew very differently situated from
what he had supposed, Mr. Stanton, with the concurrence of his wife,
whose opinion also had been changed, sent an invitation to Ralph and
Herbert to dine with them previous to their sailing for Europe. Herbert,
by his new guardian's direction, returned a polite reply, to the effect
that they were too busy in making preparations for their departure to
accept the invitation. Ralph did not feel like sitting as the guest of a
man who had cruelly defrauded him, and had only done him justice when he
was actually compelled to do so.

In due time our hero sailed for Europe with Mr. Ralph Pendleton. They
divided their time between Paris and Berlin, Herbert studying at both
places. With his natural good abilities, he made rapid progress, and at
the end of four years was an accomplished scholar, able to speak
both French and German with facility. In watching his progress, Ralph
Pendleton found a new and fresh interest in life. He recovered from his
old, morbid feeling, and became cheerful and happy. On returning to New
York, Herbert, who felt that he should enjoy a life of business better
than a professional career, entered the counting-room of Mr. Godfrey. At
twenty-one, the junior partner retiring, he was received as partner in
his place, his guardian, Ralph Pendleton, purchasing an interest for
him at a cost of fifty thousand dollars. He developed good business
abilities, and bid fair to swell this sum, in time, to a large fortune.
There is a prospect that he will, in time, sustain a closer relation to
his senior partner, as it is rumored that Julia Godfrey, now a brilliant
young belle, prefers her father's young partner to any of the crowd of
young men who pay her court.

The other characters in our story demand a few closing words. First,
for Mr. Stanton. It might have been the sudden withdrawal of the fifty
thousand dollars from his business that embarrassed him. At any rate,
from that time nothing prospered with him. He met with loss after loss,
until, in a time of financial panic he failed. He saved but a little
from the wreck of his fortune, That little started him in a modest
business, yielding him, perhaps, one-tenth his former income. The
brownstone house was sold. He moved into a shabby house in an obscure
street, where Mrs. Stanton spends her time mostly in bewailing the loss
of her former splendor.

Tom developed habits of extravagance, and seemed indisposed to work
steadily. Finally, when his reverses came, his father was compelled to
refuse further assistance, and now Tom, in an inferior clerkship, on a
small salary, gazes with envy at his once-despised cousin, with whom
he has completely changed places. How he will come out eventually is
doubtful. Unless he changes considerably, it is not likely that his
circumstances will ever be much better than at present.

Abner Holden died suddenly last year in a fit of delirium tremens. His
habits of intemperance grew upon him until they led to this sad result.
His death did not excite any very prolonged grief in the community, as
his temper and uncertain honesty had made him very far from popular. To
the housekeeper who had been kind to him, Herbert sent a valuable silk
dress, of the richest fabric, of which Mrs. Bickford is very proud. She
only wears it on great occasions, and then is particular to mention that
it was presented to her by Herbert Mason, of the great New York firm of
Godfrey & Mason, who was once Abner Holden's bound boy.

Nor was Herbert forgetful of his good friends, the Kents. He paid off
the mortgage on the doctor's place, and insisted on putting the house
in thorough repair, and newly furnishing it, so that now the town of
Waverley does not contain a handsomer house, inside and out, than that
of Dr. Kent.

So we bid farewell to our young hero, fairly launched on a prosperous
career, trusting that his life-path may be bright to the end, and that
he may leave behind him, at the end of his career, the reputation of a
noble and honorable merchant, and a life filled with good deeds.

THE END









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Try and Trust, by Horatio Alger

