
"No good has ever come to us from such alliance. No French army has
ever gone to Scotland, to aid her when pressed by Englishmen. France
uses Scotland but as a cat's paw, with which to annoy and weaken
England."

"That may be so; but you must remember that France does aid Scotland,
when she keeps the main army of England busily occupied."

"Yes; but she does not fight England with that intent. She simply
fights to gain back the provinces she has lost, and is ready to make
peace when it suits, wholly regardless of the interest of Scotland."

"France is never to be trusted," Oswald said. "Glendower made a treaty
with her, a few years ago, and what good has it done to him? Why, when
he needed her aid the most, she had made a truce with England. 'Tis
whispered that she made a treaty with the Percys, and what good came of
it? She is ever ready to make treaties, but never observes them, unless
it is to her plain interest to do so."

"I suppose it is with nations as it is with individuals, Oswald.
Selfishness has a large share in the management of affairs. France,
being a powerful country, is glad enough, when pressed by the English,
to have diversions made for her, whether in Scotland or Ireland; but
she has no idea of putting herself out, for the sake of her allies,
when she desires peace with England."

France had indeed been quick to take advantage of the trouble caused to
Henry by the rising in the north. While he was gathering his army,
although there was a truce with England, a French expedition, in which
many of the royal princes took part, had invaded Guienne, captured
several castles held by the English adherents, made frequent descents
on our coast, plundered every ship they met with, captured a whole
fleet of merchantmen, taken the islands of Guernsey and Jersey and,
while Henry was fighting at Shrewsbury, landed near Plymouth and
plundered the whole country round. On the news reaching them of the
result of the battle of Shrewsbury, they at once burned Plymouth to the
ground, and then, re-embarking, sailed for France. All remonstrances on
the part of Henry were met by declarations that these raids were
carried on without the knowledge of the French king, and were greatly
against his inclinations, which were wholly for the strictest
observance of the truce.

Nevertheless, a few months later, the Count of Saint Pol landed a force
in the Isle of Wight; but the people of the island rose in arms, and
defeated the invaders, who sailed hastily away.

Although, having other matters in hand, Henry professed to believe the
French king's assurances; the sailors and ship masters were in no way
content to suffer unresistingly, and the men of the seaports of the
east coast, and of Plymouth and Fowey, banded themselves together, and
carried on war on their own account; capturing several fleets of ships,
loaded with wine and other valuable commodities; burning the coast
towns; and making several raids into the interior of France, and
carrying off much plunder.

Enraged at this retaliation, the French incited the Flemings, Dutch,
and Hollanders to cruise against the English; and these, sailing in
great ships, executed so many atrocities upon English crews and ships
that, later, Henry himself sent out a fleet, under his second son, who
executed his commission, effectually destroying ships, burning towns,
and putting the people to the sword without mercy.

Thus the breaches of the peace by the French recoiled terribly upon
themselves, and they suffered vastly greater loss than they had
inflicted upon the English.

From the time when he let slip the opportunities, both of joining
Hotspur and of falling on the royal army after their victory,
Glendower's power declined. For a time he continued to capture castles,
and to carry out raids across the border, but gradually he was driven
back to his mountain strongholds. His followers lost heart. He became a
fugitive, and died on the 20th of September, 1415, in the sixty-first
year of his age, at the house of one of his married daughters, whether
at Scudamore or Mornington is unknown.

Mortimer died in Harlech Castle, during the time it was besieged by the
English. It is said that his death was caused by depression and grief
at the misfortunes that had befallen him.

The Earl of Northumberland, as John Forster had anticipated, raised the
standard of revolt in 1405, in concert with the Archbishop of York and
some other nobles; but before he could join these with his forces, they
had been forced to surrender to the king, who had marched north with a
great army. The archbishop and some of his associates were executed,
and the earl, finding himself unable to oppose so great a force, fled
into Scotland. Alnwick surrendered without resistance, and Warkworth
after a siege of eight days. Berwick was captured, and its governor and
several knights executed.

Escaping from Scotland, where he feared that he might be seized and
surrendered to England, the earl sailed to Wales, and for some little
time stayed with Glendower; then he crossed to the Continent, and in
1408 landed in Yorkshire and again raised his standard. The sheriff of
the county called out the levies, and attacked him at Branham Moor,
where the old earl was killed and his followers defeated.

In 1415 the king, being on the eve of war with France, and anxious to
obtain the goodwill and support of the Northumbrians, restored
Hotspur's son, who had been for years a fugitive in Scotland, to the
estates and honours of his father and grandfather.

Fortunate it was, for Oswald, that the capture of his fellow
conspirators caused the earl to retreat, in 1405, without giving
battle. The young knight had, at his summons, called out his tenants,
and with them and his retainers had joined Percy. As soon as the latter
decided to fly to Scotland, his force scattered, and Oswald returned
home with his following.

He took no part in the final rising. Before this took place he had
married his cousin, Janet. His father lived to be present at the
wedding, but died the following year; and, in accordance with his
wishes, Oswald took up his abode at Yardhope, which he largely added
to, and strongly fortified. Here his mother lived with him until her
death, ten years later.

Oswald offered to Roger the command of his castle at Stoubes, but the
burly squire preferred staying at Yardhope, with his master. He himself
had taken a wife, the daughter of one of the principal tenants on the
estate, on the same day that Oswald married Janet.

His uncle, after the surrender of Alnwick, lived at Yardhope until, at
the return of Hotspur's son as Earl of Northumberland, he resumed his
old position as captain of the garrison, and maintained it until his
death.



