them with hoes and other implements. When the negroes came up there was
a desperate quarrel, but our hands stood firm, and Tony and Dan declared
that they would shoot the first four men that advanced, and at last they
drew off and made their way to Richmond.

"Your plan has succeeded admirably. One or two of the hands went to
Richmond next day, but returned a day or two afterward and begged so
hard to be taken on again that I forgave them. Since then everything has
been going on as quietly and regularly as usual, while there is scarcely
a man left on any of the estates near."

"And now, mother, that I find things are quiet and settled here, I shall
go down to Georgia and fetch Lucy home. I shall be of age in a few
months, and the house on the estate that comes to me then can be
enlarged a bit, and will do very well."

"Not at all, Vincent. Annie will be married next month. Herbert Rowsell
was here two days ago, and it's all settled. So I shall be alone here.
It will be very lonely and dull for me, Vincent, and I would rather give
up the reins of government to Lucy and live here with you, if you like
the plan."

"Certainly, I should like it, mother, and so, I am sure, would Lucy."

"Well, at any rate, Vincent, we will try the experiment, and if it does
not work well I will take possession of the other house."

"There is no fear of that, mother, none whatever."

"And when are you thinking of getting married, Vincent?"

"At once, mother. I wrote to her the day we were disbanded saying that I
should come in a week, and would allow another week and no longer for
her to get ready."

"Then, in that case, Vincent, Annie and I will go down with you. Annie
will not have much to do to get ready for her own wedding. It must, of
course, be a very quiet one, and there will be no array of dresses to
get; for I suppose it will be some time yet before the railways are open
again and things begin to come down from the North."

Happily Antioch had escaped the ravages of war, and there was nothing to
mar the happiness of the wedding. Lucy's father had returned, having
lost a leg in one of the battles of the Wilderness a year before, and
her brother had also escaped. After the wedding they returned to their
farm in Tennessee, and Mrs. Wingfield, Annie, Vincent, and Lucy went
back to the Orangery.

For the next three or four years times were very hard in Virginia, and
Mrs. Wingfield had to draw upon her savings to keep up the house in its
former state; while the great majority of the planters were utterly
ruined.

The negroes, however, for the most part remained steadily working on the
estate. A few wandered away, but their places were easily filled; for
the majority of the freed slaves very soon discovered that their lot was
a far harder one than it had been before, and that freedom so suddenly
given was a curse rather than a blessing to them.

Thus, while so many went down, the Wingfields weathered the storm, and
the step that had been taken in preparing their hands for the general
abolition of slavery was a complete success.

With the gradual return of prosperity to the South the prices of produce
improved, and ten years after the conclusion of the rebellion the income
of the Orangery was nearly as large as it had been previous to its
outbreak. Vincent, two years after the conclusion of the struggle, took
his wife over to visit his relations in England, and, since the death of
his mother in 1879, has every year spent three or four months at home,
and will not improbably ere long sell his estates in Virginia and settle
in England altogether.







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of With Lee in Virginia, by G. A. Henty

