try and try and try, and it does pay.



       *       *       *       *       *



Among the Forest People.

By CLARA D. PIERSON.

Illustrated by F. C. Gordon.

12mo, 220 pages, cloth, gilt top--$1.25.

[Illustration]

"A most charming series of stories for children--yes, and for children
of all ages, both young and old--is given us in the volume before us. No
one can read these realistic conversations of the little creatures of
the wood without being most tenderly drawn toward them, and each story
teaches many entertaining facts regarding the lives and habits of these
little people. Mothers and teachers must welcome this little book most
cordially. One cannot speak too strongly in praise of it."--_Boston
Transcript._

"In pleasant story-telling guise, much information is conveyed, and the
pictures are a further help. A clever and charming book."--_Philadelphia
Eve. Telegraph._

"Is a book that every child will like to read."--_Hartford Courant._

"The scheme of the book is felicitous, and it is worked out with an
acute and sympathetic appreciation of methods for enlisting the
attention and impressing intelligently the memory of children. The
illustrations are distinctly helpful."--_Troy Daily Press._

"One does not know which to admire most--the intimate footing upon which
the author stands with the forest folk, or the intelligent sympathy she
has with sweet child life. She seems to be equally in touch with
both."--_Churchman._


Sent by mail, post-paid, on receipt of price.

E. P. DUTTON & CO., Publishers, 31 West 23d Street, New York.



       *       *       *       *       *



"_Many a mother and teacher will accord a vote of thanks to
the author._"

[Illustration]

~Among the Meadow People.~

STORIES OF FIELD LIFE, WRITTEN FOR THE LITTLE ONES.

By CLARA D. PIERSON.

Illustrated by F. C. GORDON.

  12mo, 127 pages, cloth, gilt top            $1.25.

       *       *       *       *       *

"One of the daintiest and in many ways most attractive of the many books
of nature study which the past year has brought forth."--_Boston
Advertiser._

"They are like Mrs. Gatty's well-known 'Parables from Nature,' written
in the best of English, as fascinating as fairy tales, and yet 'really
true,' a quality which we all know appeals to the childish mind."--_N.
Y. Evangelist._

"We have seen nothing better for its purpose, and hope many a teacher of
kindergartens and many a mother may avail herself of the privilege of
using these little tales."--_N.Y. Christian Advocate._

"It will be a great advance in the work of education in the school and
the home when such books are more generally utilized."--_Zion's Herald._

"These charming stories of field life will delight many a child of
kindergarten age; and it is safe to say that older brothers and sisters
will also want to claim a share in them."--_Christian Register._

       *       *       *       *       *

Sent by mail, post-paid, on receipt of price.

  E. P. DUTTON & CO., Publishers,

  31 West 23d Street, New York.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Among the Farmyard People, by
Clara Dillingham Pierson

