that Bill Jarvis again. He stopped short when he saw my Pretty.

'Well, Mary?' says 'e.

'Well, Bill?' says she.

'Is that my kid?' says 'e.

'Whose else's would it be?' says she, flashing up at him; 'ain't it
enough to deceive a girl, and desert her, without throwing mud in
her face on the top of it all? Whose else's should the child be but
yours?'

'Go easy,' says Bill, 'I didn't mean that, my girl. Look 'ere, says
'e, 'I got out of that scrape, thanks to your father, and I want to
let bygones be bygones, and I'll marry you to-morrow, if you like,
and be a father to the kid.'

Then Mary, she stood up on her feet, with the little one in 'er
arms.

'Marry you!' says she, 'I wouldn't marry you if you was the only man
in the world. Me marry a man as could serve a girl as you served me?
Not if it was to save me from hanging? Me give the kid a father like
you? Thank God, the child's my own, and you can't touch it. I tell
you,' says she, 'shame and all, I'd rather have things as they are,
than have married you in church and 'ave found out afterwards what a
cowardly beast you are.'

And with that she walks past 'im, looking like a queen, and down
into her cabin; and 'e was left a-standin' there sucking the end of
his stick and looking like a fool.

'I think, perhaps,' says I afterwards, 'you ought to 'ave let 'im
make an honest woman of you.'

'I'm as honest as I want to be,' says she, 'and the child is all my
own now.' So no more was said.

And things went on the same old sleepy way, like they always do on
the river, and we forgot the shame almost, in the pleasure of having
the little thing about us. And so the time went on, till one day at
Maidstone a Sister of Charity with one of those white caps and a big
cross round her neck, come down to the water's side inquiring for
Tom Allbutt.

'That's me,' says my old man.

'There's a young man ill in hospital,' says she. 'He's dying, I'm
afraid, and he wants to see you before he goes. It's typhoid fever,
but that's over now; he's dying of weakness, they say.'

And when we asked the young man's name, of course it was Bill
Jarvis. So we left my Pretty in charge of the barge, and my old man
and me, we went up to the hospital.

Bill was so changed you wouldn't 'ardly 'ave known 'im. From being a
fleshy, red-cheeked young fellow, he'd come to be as thin as a
skeleton, and 'is eyes seemed to fill half 'is face.

'I want to marry Mary,' says 'e. 'I'm dying, I can't do her and the
kid no 'arm now, and I should die easier if she'd marry me here; the
chaplain would do it--he said so.'

My old man didn't say nothin', but says I, 'I would dearly like her
to be made an honest woman of.'

'It's me that wants to be made an honest man of,' says Bill. And
with that my old man, he took his hand and shook it. Then says Bill
with the tears runnin' down his cheeks,--partly from weakness, I
suppose, for 'e wasn't the crying sort--'So help me God, I never
knew what a beast I was till that day I come to you in your barge
and you showed me what a man was, Tom Allbutt; you did, so, and I've
been trying to be a man ever since, and I've given up the drink, and
I've lived steady, and I've never so much as looked at another girl
since that night. Oh, get her to be my wife,' says 'e, 'and let me
die easy.'

And I went and fetched 'er, and she came along with me with the
child in her arms; and the chaplain married them then and there. I
don't know how it was the banns didn't have to be put up, but it was
managed somehow.

'And you'll stay with me till I die,' says 'e, 'won't you, Mary, you
and the kid?'

But he didn't die, he got better, and there isn't a couple happier
than him and Mary, for all they've gone through.

And the doctor says it was Mary saved his life, for it was after he
had had a little talk with her that he took a turn for the better.

'Mary,' says 'e, 'I've been a bad lot, and you was in the right when
you called me a coward and a beast; but your father showed me what a
man was, and I've tried to be a man. You was fond of me once, Mary;
you'll love me a little when I'm gone, and don't let the kid think
unkind of her daddy.'

'Love you when you're gone?' says she, cryin' all over 'er face, and
kissin' 'im as if it was for a wager; 'you ain't a-goin' to die,
you're goin' to live along of me and baby. Love you when you're
gone?' says she, 'why, I've loved you all the time!' she says.









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of In Homespun, by Edith Nesbit

