possible that some ship may have passed the island without attracting
our notice. What is your opinion, Mr. Holdfast?"

"The flag of the Nantucket, as you know, has floated night and day
from a pole erected on a high bluff," said the mate. "The chances are
that if any vessel had come sufficiently near it would have attracted
attention, and led to a boat being lowered, and an exploring party
sent thither."

"While we've got any provisions left," said the boatswain, "let us
take the boats, and pull out to sea. We can go where the ships are,
and then we'll have some chance. They'll never find us here,
leastways, such is my opinion."

"My friends," said the mate, "you have heard the proposal made by the
boatswain. All who are in favor of it will please raise their right
hand."

All voted in the affirmative.

"My friends," said Mr. Holdfast, "it seems to be the unanimous
sentiment that we leave the island, and sail out far enough to be in
the course of passing vessels. I concur in the expediency of this
step, and am ready to command one of the boats. Mr. Harrison will
command the other."

"How soon shall we start?" asked a passenger.

"The sooner the better! To-morrow morning, if it is pleasant."

This decision pleased all. Something was to be done, and hope was
rekindled in the breasts of all. Heretofore they had been living on,
without hope or prospect of release. Now they were to set out boldly,
and though there was the possibility of failure, there was also a
chance of deliverance.

No sooner was the decision made than all hands went to work to prepare
for embarking.

In the appointment of passengers, Mr. Holdfast, who commanded the long
boat, retained Harry, the professor and Clinton. Six sailors,
including Jack Pendleton, made up the complement.

"I am glad you are going to be with us, Jack," said Harry, joyfully.
"I shouldn't like to be separated from you."

"Nor I from you, Harry," returned Jack.

At eight o'clock the next morning they started. As the island faded in
the distance, all looked back thoughtfully at their sometime home.

Three days the boats floated about on the bosom of the ocean--three
days and nights of anxiety, during which no sail was visible. But at
length a ship was sighted.

"In one way or another we must try to attract attention," said the
mate.

Not to protract the reader's suspense, let me say that by great good
fortune the mate of the approaching ship, in sweeping the ocean with
his glass caught sight of the two boats, and changed the course of the
vessel so as to fall in with them.

"Who are you?" he hailed.

"Shipwrecked sailors and passengers of the ship Nantucket," was the
answer of Mr. Holdfast.

They were taken on board, and discovered that the vessel was the
Phocis, from New York, bound for Melbourne.

"We shall reach our destination after all, then, professor," said
Harry, "and you will be able to give your entertainments as you at
first proposed."

Professor Hemenway shook his head.

"I shall take the first steamer home," he said. "My wife will be
anxious about me, and even now is in doubt whether I am alive or dead.
You can return with me, if you like."

"No," answered Harry. "After the trouble I have had in getting to
Australia, I mean to stay long enough to see what sort of a country it
is. I think I can make a living in one way or another, and if I can't,
I will send to America for the money I have there."

In due time they reached Melbourne, without further mischance. Harry
induced Jack to remain with him, but Mr. Clinton, with a new stock of
trousers, purchased in Melbourne, returned to America on the same
steamer with the professor.

Here we leave Harry and Jack to pursue their course to such eminence
as they may desire from the characteristics they have portrayed in
this narrative.


THE END









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Facing the World, by Horatio Alger

