The shock of the explosion was terrible. It was like the bursting of
an immense bomb-shell, the steam man being blown into thousands of
fragments, that scattered death and destruction in every direction.
Falling in the very center of the crouching Indians, it could but make
a terrible destruction of life, while those who escaped unharmed, were
beside themselves with consternation.

This was the very thing upon which young Brainerd had counted, and for
which he made his calculations. When he saw it leap toward the wall in
such a furious manner, he knew the inevitable consequence, and gave
the word to his friends to take to their legs.

All three dashed up the bank, and reaching the surface of the prairie,
Baldy Bicknell took the lead, exclaiming:

'Now fur the wood yonder!'

As they reached the grove, one or two of the number glanced back, but
saw nothing of the pursuing Indians. They had not yet recovered from
their terror.

Not a moment was to be lost. The experienced eye of the trapper lost
no time in selecting the very best Indian horses, and a moment later
all four rode out from the grove at a full gallop, and headed toward
the Missouri.

The precise result of the steam man's explosion was never learned. How
many wore killed and wounded could only be conjectured; but the number
certainly was so great that our friends saw nothing more of them.

They evidently had among their number those who had become pretty well
acquainted with the steam man, else they would not have laid the plan
which they did for capturing him.

Being well mounted, the party made the entire journey to Independence
on horseback. From this point they took passage to St. Louis, where
the gold was divided, and the party separated, and since then have
seen nothing of each other.

Mickey McSquizzle returned to Ballyduff Kings County, Ireland, where,
we heard, he and his gentle Bridget, are in the full enjoyment of the
three thousand pounds he carried with him.

Ethan Hopkins settled down with the girl of his choice in Connecticut,
where, at last accounts, he was doing as well as could be expected.

Baldy Bicknell, although quite a wealthy man, still clings to his
wandering habits, and spends the greater portion of his time on the
prairies.

With the large amount of money realized from his western trip, Johnny
Brainerd is educating himself at one of the best schools in the
country. When he shall have completed his course, it is his intention
to construct another steam man, capable of more wonderful performances
than the first.

So let our readers and the public generally be on the lookout.



THE END.









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Huge Hunter, by Edward S. Ellis

