thou hast suffered another misfortune."

   [Footnote 795: This Epicurean sentiment is illustrated with great
   learning by Duport, pp. 140, sqq.]

   [Footnote 796: See Duport, pp. 142, sqq.]

   [Footnote 797: Catullus, lxii. 25: "Teque adeo eximie taedis
   felicibus aucte Thessaliae columen Peleu, quoi Juppiter ipse, Ipse
   suos divum genitor concessit amores."]

But him Priam, the godlike old man, then, answered:

"Do not at all place me on a seat, O Jove-nurtured, whilst Hector lies
unburied in thy tents; but redeem him as soon as possible, that I may
behold him with mine eyes; and do thou receive the many ransoms which we
bring thee; and mayest thou enjoy them, and reach thy father-land, since
thou hast suffered me in the first place to live, and to behold the
light of the sun."

But him swift-footed Achilles, sternly regarding, then addressed:

"Do not irritate me further, old man, for I also myself meditate
ransoming Hector to thee; for the mother who bore me, the daughter of
the marine old man, came as a messenger from Jove to me. And I perceive
thee also, O Priam, in my mind, nor do thou deceive me, that some one of
the gods has led thee to the swift ships of the Greeks; for a mortal
would not have dared to come into the camp, not even in very blooming
youth, for he could not have escaped the guards, nor indeed pushed back
the bars of our gates. Wherefore do not move my mind more to sorrows,
lest I leave thee not unharmed, old man, in my tents, though being a
suppliant, and violate the commands of Jove."

Thus he spoke; but the old man feared, and obeyed. But the son of Peleus
leaped forth, like a lion, from the door of the house, not alone; for
two attendants accompanied him, the hero Automedon, and Alcimus, whom
Achilles honoured most of his companions next after the deceased
Patroclus. These then unharnessed the horses and mules from the yoke,
and led in the clear-voiced herald of the old man, and placed him upon a
seat. They also took down from the well-polished car the countless
ransoms of Hector's head. But they left two cloaks and a well-woven
tunic, in order that, having covered the body, he might give it to be
borne home. But having called his female attendants, he ordered them to
wash and anoint all round, taking it apart, that Priam might not see his
son; lest, seeing his son, he might not restrain the wrath in his
grieving heart, and might arouse the soul of Achilles, and he might slay
him, and violate the commands of Jove. But when the servants had washed
and anointed it with oil, they then threw over him a beautiful cloak,
and a tunic; then Achilles himself, having raised him up, placed him
upon a litter, and his companions, together with [him], lifted him upon
the well-polished chariot. But he moaned, and called upon his dear
companion by name:

"O Patroclus, be not wrathful with me, if thou shouldst hear, although
being in Hades, that I have ransomed noble Hector to his beloved father,
since he has not given me unworthy ransoms. Besides even of these will I
give thee a share, whatever is just."

Noble Achilles spoke, and returned into the tent, and sat down upon a
well-made couch, whence he had risen, at the opposite wall, and
addressed Priam:

"Thy son is indeed redeemed to thee, as thou didst desire, and lies upon
a bier; and with the early dawn thou shalt behold him, conveying [him
away]: but now let us be mindful of the feast; for even fair-haired
Niobe was mindful of food, although twelve children perished in her
palaces, six daughters and six youthful sons; these indeed Apollo slew
with his silver bow, enraged with Niobe; but those, arrow-rejoicing
Diana, because, forsooth, she had compared herself with fair-cheeked
Latona. She said that [Latona] had borne [only] two, whereas she had
borne many; yet those, though being only two, destroyed all [her own].
Nine days indeed they lay in blood, nor was there any one to bury them,
for the son of Saturn had made the people stones; but upon the tenth day
the heavenly gods interred them. Still was she mindful of food, when she
was fatigued with weeping. Now, indeed, ever amidst the rocks, in the
desert mountains, in Sipylus, where, they say, the beds of the goddess
Nymphs are, who lead the dance around Acheloues, there, although being a
stone, she broods over the sorrows [sent] from the gods. But come now, O
noble old man, let us likewise attend to food, but afterwards thou
mayest lament thy beloved son, conveying him into Troy; and he will be
bewailed by thee with many tears."

Swift Achilles spoke, and leaping up, slew a white sheep, and his
companions flayed it well, and fitly dressed it; then they skilfully cut
it in pieces, pierced them with spits, roasted them diligently, and drew
them all off. Then Automedon, taking bread, distributed it over the
table in beautiful baskets; whilst Achilles helped the meat, and they
stretched out their hands to the prepared victuals lying before them.
But when they had dismissed the desire of food and drink, Dardanian
Priam indeed marvelled at Achilles, such and so great; for he was like
unto the gods; but Achilles marvelled at Dardanian Priam, seeing his
amiable countenance, and hearing his conversation. When, however, they
were satisfied with gazing at each other, him Priam, the godlike old
man, first addressed:

"Send me now to rest as soon as possible, O Jove-nurtured, that we,
reclining, may take our fill of sweet sleep; for never have these eyes
been closed beneath my eyelids from the time when my son lost his life
by thy hands; but I ever lament and cherish many woes, rolling in the
dust within the enclosures of my palaces. But now I have tasted food,
and poured sweet wine down my throat; for before indeed I had not tasted
it."

He spoke; but Achilles ordered his companions, servants, and maids, to
place couches beneath the porch, and to spread beautiful purple mats on
them, and to strew embroidered carpets over them, and to lay on them
well-napped cloaks, to be drawn over all. But they went out of the hall,
having a torch in their hands, and hastening, they quickly spread two
couches. But the swift-footed Achilles, jocularly addressing him,[798]
said:

   [Footnote 798: "Achilles, in a mood partly jocular and partly
   serious, reminds Priam of the real circumstances of his
   situation, not for the sake of alarming him, but of accounting
   for his choosing the place he did for the couch of the aged
   king."--Kennedy.]

"Do you lie without, O revered old man, lest some counsellor of the
Greeks come hither, who, sitting with me, constantly meditate plans, as
is just. If any of these should see thee in the dark and dangerous
night, he would forthwith tell Agamemnon, the shepherd of the people,
and perchance there would be a delay of the redemption of the body. But
come, tell me this, and tell it accurately: How many days dost thou
desire to perform the funeral rites of noble Hector, that I may myself
remain quiet so long, and restrain the people?"

But him Priam, the godlike old man, then answered:

"If indeed thou desirest me to celebrate the funeral of noble Hector,
thus doing, O Achilles, thou dost surely gratify me. For thou knowest
how we are hemmed in within the city, and it is far to carry wood from
the mountain; and the Trojans greatly dread [to do so]. Nine days indeed
we would lament him in our halls, but on the tenth would bury him, and
the people should feast; but upon the eleventh we would make a tomb to
him, and on the twelfth we will fight, if necessary." But him
swift-footed Achilles again addressed:

"These things shall be to thee, O aged Priam, as thou desirest; for I
will prevent the fight as long a time as thou desirest."

Thus having spoken, he grasped the right hand of the old man near the
wrist, lest he should fear in his mind. They indeed, the herald and
Priam, slept there in the porch of the house, having prudent counsels in
their mind; while Achilles slept in the interior of the well-built tent;
and beside him lay fair-cheeked Briseis.

The other gods indeed and chariot-fighting men slept all night, subdued
by gentle slumber; but sleep seized not Mercury, the author of good,
revolving in his mind how he should convey away king Priam from the
ships, having escaped the notice of the sacred gate-keeper. Accordingly
he stood over his head, and addressed him:

"O aged man, certainly evil is not at all a care to thee, that thou
sleepest thus amongst hostile men, after Achilles has suffered thee. Now
indeed thou hast ransomed thy beloved son, and hast given much; but the
sons left behind by thee would give three times as many ransoms for thee
alive, if Agamemnon, the son of Atreus, should know of thy being here,
and all the Greeks should know of it."

Thus he spoke; but the old man feared, and awoke the herald. Then for
them Mercury yoked the horses and mules, and quickly drove them himself
through the camp, nor did any one perceive. But when they reached the
course of the fair-flowing river, eddying Xanthus, which immortal Jove
begat, then indeed Mercury went away to lofty Olympus; and saffron-robed
Morn was diffused over the whole earth. They indeed drove the horses
towards the city with wailing and lamentation, and the mules bore the
body; nor did any other of the men and well-girdled women previously
perceive it; but Cassandra, like unto golden Venus, ascending Pergamus,
discovered her dear father standing in the driving-seat, and the
city-summoning herald. She beheld him also upon the mules, lying on the
litter; then indeed she shrieked, and cried aloud throughout the whole
city:

"O Trojans and Trojan women, going forth, behold Hector, if ever ye
rejoiced at his returning alive from battle; for he was a great joy to
the city, and to the whole people."

Thus she spoke; nor was there any man left in the city, nor woman; for
insupportable grief came upon them all, and they met him near the gates
bringing in the body. But his wife and venerable mother first rushing to
the well-wheeled chariot, plucked out their hair, touching his head; and
the crowd stood around, weeping. And they indeed would have wept the
whole day till sunset before the gates, lamenting Hector, had not the
old man addressed the people from his chariot:

"Give way to me, to pass through with the mules; but afterwards shall ye
be satiated with weeping, after I shall carry him home." Thus he spoke;
but they stood off. and made way for the chariot. But when they had
brought him into the illustrious palace, they laid him upon perforated
beds, and placed singers beside him, leaders of the dirges, who indeed
sang a mournful ditty, while the women also uttered responsive groans.
And amongst them white-armed Andromache began the lamentation, holding
the head of man-slaughtering Hector between her hands:

"O husband, young in years hast thou died, and hast left me a widow in
the palace. And besides, thy son is thus an infant, to whom thou and I,
ill-fated, gave birth; nor do I think he will attain to puberty; for
before that, this city will be overthrown from its summit. Certainly
thou, the protector, art dead, who didst defend its very self, and didst
protect its venerable wives and infant children; who will soon be
carried away in the hollow ships, and I indeed amongst them. But thou, O
my son, wilt either accompany me, where thou shalt labour unworthy
tasks, toiling for a merciless lord; or some one of the Greeks, enraged,
seizing thee by the hand, will hurl thee from a tower, to sad
destruction; to whom doubtless Hector has slain a brother, or a father,
or even a son; for by the hands of Hector very many Greeks have grasped
the immense earth with their teeth. For thy father was not gentle in the
sad conflict; wherefore indeed the people lament him throughout the
city. But thou hast caused unutterable grief and sorrow to thy parents,
O Hector, but chiefly to me are bitter sorrows left. For thou didst not
stretch out thy hands to me from the couch when dying; nor speak any
prudent word [of solace], which I might for ever remember, shedding
tears night and day."

Thus she spoke, bewailing; but the women also lamented; and to them in
turn Hecuba began her vehement lamentation:

"O Hector, far of all my sons dearest to my soul, certainly being alive
to me, thou wert beloved by the gods, who truly have had a care of thee,
even in the destiny of death. For swift-footed Achilles sold[799] all my
other sons, whomsoever he seized, beyond the unfruitful sea, at Samos,
Imbrus, and Lemnos without a harbour. But when he had taken away thy
life with his long-bladed spear, he often dragged thee round the tomb of
his comrade Patroclus, whom thou slewest; but he did not thus raise him
up. But now thou liest, to my sorrow, in the palaces, fresh[800] and
lately slain like him whom silver-bowed Apollo, attacking, has slain
with his mild weapons."

   [Footnote 799: See Grote, vol. i. p. 399.]

   [Footnote 800: See on ver. 419.]

Thus she spoke, weeping; and aroused a vehement lamentation. But to them
Helen then, the third, began her lamentation:

"O Hector, far dearest to my soul of all my brothers-in-law, for godlike
Alexander is my husband, he who brought me to Troy:--would that I had
perished first. But now already this is the twentieth year to me from
the time when I came from thence, and quitted my native land; yet have I
never heard from thee a harsh or reproachful word; but if any other of
my brothers-in-law, or sisters-in-law, or well-attired husband's
brothers' wives, reproached me in the palaces, or my mother-in-law (for
my father-in-law was ever gentle as a father), then thou, admonishing
him with words, didst restrain him, both by thy gentleness and thy
gentle words. So that, grieved at heart, I bewail at the same time thee
and myself, unhappy; for there is not any other in wide Troy kind and
friendly to me; but all abhor me."

Thus she spoke, weeping; and again the countless throng groaned. And
aged Priam spoke [this] speech amongst the people:

"O Trojans, now bring wood to the city, nor at all fear in your mind a
close ambuscade of the Greeks; for Achilles, dismissing me from the dark
ships, thus promised me, that he would not commence hostilities, before
the twelfth morning should arrive."

Thus he spoke; and they yoked both oxen and mules beneath the waggons;
and then assembled before the city. For nine days indeed they brought
together an immense quantity of wood; but when now the tenth morn,
bearing light to mortals, had appeared, then indeed, weeping, they
carried out noble Hector, and placed the body on the lofty pile, and
cast in the fire.

But when the mother of dawn, rosy-fingered Morn, appeared, then were the
people assembled round the pile of illustrious Hector. But after they
were assembled, and collected together, first indeed they extinguished
all the pyre with dark wine, as much as the force of the fire had
possessed; but then his brothers and companions collected his white
bones, weeping, and the abundant tear streamed down their cheeks. And,
taking them, they placed them in a golden urn, covering them with soft
purple robes, and forthwith deposited it in a hollow grave; and then
strewed it above with numerous great stones. But they built up the tomb
in haste, and watches sat around on every side, lest the well-greaved
Greeks should make an attack too soon. And having heaped up the tomb,
they returned; and then being assembled together in order, they feasted
on a splendid banquet in the palaces of Priam, the Jove-nurtured king.

Thus indeed they performed the funeral of steed-breaking Hector.



END OF THE ILIAD.


PRINTED BY W. CLOWES AND SONS, STAMFORD STREET, AND CHARING CROSS.











End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Iliad of Homer (1873), by Homer

