Nothing to look at beside his mother!'

'If you could only see Madame de Selinville!' sighed Philip; then--'Ah!
sir, you would know the worth of Eustacie had you seen her in yonder
town.'

'Very like!' said Sir Marmaduke; 'but after all our fears at home of a
fine court madam, it takes one aback to see a little homely brown thing,
clad like a serving wench. Well, Dame Nan will not be displeased, she
always said the girl would grow up no beauty, and 'tis the way of
women to brook none fairer than themselves! Better so. She is a good
Protestant, and has done rarely by you, Phil.'

'Truly, I might be glad 'twas no court madam that stood by me when Berry
was called back to the fight: and for the little one, 'tis the loveliest
and bravest little maid I ever saw. Have they told you of the marigolds,
father?'

'Why, the King told the whole to the Duchess, so Berry said, and then
drank the health of the daughter of the bravest of knights; and Berry
held her up in his arms to bow again, and drink to them from his glass.
Berry looked a proud man, I can tell you, and a comely, spite of his
baldness; and 'tis worth having come here to see how much you lads are
thought of--though to be sure 'tis not often the poor creatures here see
so much of an Englishman as we have made of Berry.'

Philip could not but laugh. ''Tis scarce for that that they value him,
sir.'

'Say you so? Nay, methinks his English heart and yours did them good
service. Indeed, the King himself told me as much by the mouth of
Merrycourt. May that youngster's head only not be turned! Why, they set
him at table above Berenger, and above half the King's gentlemen. Even
the Duchess makes as if he were one of her highest guests--he a poor
Oxford scholar, doubting if he can get his bread by the law, and flouted
as though he were not good enough for my daughter. 'Tis the world
topsy turvy, sure enough! And that this true love that Berenger has run
through fire and water after, like a knight in a pedlar's run through
turn out a mere little, brown, common-looking woman after all, not one
whit equal to Lucy!'

Sir Marmaduke modified his disappointment a little that night, when he
had talked Philip into a state of feverishness and suffering that became
worse under Madame de Quinet's reproofs and remedies, and only yielded
to Eustacie's long and patient soothing. He then could almost have owned
that it was well she was not like his own cherished type of womanhood,
and the next day he changed his opinion still more, even as to her
appearance.

There was a great gathering of favourers of the Huguenot cause on that
day; gentlemen came from all parts to consult with Henry of Navarre, and
Madame de Quinet had too much sense of the fitness of things to allow
Madame de Ribaumont to appear at the ensuing banquet in her shabby,
rusty black serge, and tight white borderless cap. The whole wardrobe of
the poor young Duchess de Quinet was placed at her service, and though,
with the thought of her adopted father on her heart, she refused gay
colours, yet when, her toilette complete, she said into Philip's room,
he almost sprang up in delight, and Sir Marmaduke rose and ceremoniously
bowed as to a stranger, and was only undeceived when little Rayonette
ran joyously to Philip, asking if _Manan_ was not _si belle, si belle_.

The effects of her unrestful nights has now passed away, and left her
magnificent eyes in their full brilliancy and arch fire; the blooming
glow was restored to her cheek; and though neck, brow, and hands were
browner than in the shelter of convent or palace, she was far more near
absolute beauty than in former days, both from countenance and from
age. Her little proud head was clustered with glossy locks of jet, still
short, but curling round her brow and neck, whose warm brunette tints
contrasted well with the delicate, stiffened cobweb of her exquisite
standing ruff, which was gathered into a white satin bodice, with a
skirt of the same material, over which swept a rich black brocade train
open in front, with an open body and half-sleeves with falling lace, and
the hands, delicate and shapely as ever, if indeed a little tanned, held
fan and handkerchief with as much courtly grace as though they had never
stirred broth nor wrung out linen. Sir Marmaduke really feared he had
the court madam on his hands after all, but he forgot all about his
fears, as she stood laughing and talking, and by her pretty airs and
gestures, smiles and signs, making him enter into her mirth with Philip,
almost as well as if she had not spoken French.

Even Berenger started, when he came up after the counsel to fetch her
to the banqueting-hall. She was more entirely the Eustacie of the Louvre
than he had ever realized seeing her, and yet so much more; and when the
Duchess beheld the sensation she produced among the _noblesse_, it was
with self-congratulation in having kept her in retirement while it
was still not known that she was not a widow. The King of Navarre had
already found her the only lady present possessed of the peculiar aroma
of high-breeding which belonged to the society in which both he and she
had been most at home, and his attentions were more than she liked from
one whose epithet of Eurydice she had never quite forgiven; at least,
that was the only reason she could assign for her distaste, but the
Duchess understood her better than did Berenger, nay, better than she
did herself, and kept her under the maternal wings of double form and
ceremony.

Berenger, meanwhile, was in great favour. A command had been offered him
by the King of Navarre, who had promised that if he would cast in his
lot with the Huguenots, his claims on all the lands of Ribaumont should
be enforced on the King of France when terms were wrung from him, and
Narcisse's death removed all valid obstacle to their recognition; but
Berenger felt himself bound by all home duties to return to England, nor
had he clear convictions as to the absolute right of the war in which
he had almost unconsciously drawn his sword. Under the Tudors the divine
right of kings was strongly believed in, and it was with many genuine
misgivings that the cause of Protestant revolt was favoured by Elisabeth
and her ministers; and Berenger, bred up in a strong sense of loyalty,
as well as in doctrines that, as he had received them, savoured as
little of Calvinism as of Romanism, was not ready to espouse the
Huguenot cause with all his heart; and as he could by no means have
fought on the side of King Henry III. or of the Guises, felt thankful
that the knot could be cut by renouncing France altogether, according
to the arrangement which had been defeated by the Chevalier's own
supper-subtle machinations.

At the conference of gentlemen held at Quinet, he had been startled by
hearing the name of the Sieur de Bellaise, and had identified him with
a grave, thin, noble-looking man, with an air of high-bred and patient
poverty. He was a Catholic but no Guisard, and supported the middle
policy of the Montmorency party, so far as he possessed any influence;
but his was only the weight of personal character, for he had merely a
small property that had descended to him through his grandmother, the
wife of the unfortunate Bellaise who had pined to death in the dungeon
at Loches, under Louis XI. Here, then, Berenger saw the right means of
riding himself and his family of the burthen that his father had mourned
over, and it only remained to convince Eustacie. Her first feeling when
she heard of the King's offer, was that at last her ardent wish would
be gratified, she should see her husband at the head of her vassals,
and hear the war-cry motto '_A moi Ribaumont_.' Then came the old
representation that the Vendeen peasants were faithful Catholics who
could hardly be asked to fight on the Calvinist side. The old spirit
rose in a flush, a pout, a half-uttered query why those creatures should
be allowed their opinions. Madame la Baronne was resuming her haughty
temperament in the _noblesse_ atmosphere; but in the midst came the
remembrance of having made that very speech in her Temple ruin--of the
grave sad look of rebuke and shake of the head with which the good old
minister had received it--and how she had sulked at him till forced to
throw herself on him to hinder her separation from her child. She burst
into tears, and as Berenger, in some distress, began to assure her that
he would and could do nothing without her consent, she struggled to
recover voice to say, 'No! no! I only grieve that I am still as wicked
as ever, after these three years with that saint, my dear father. Do as
you will, only pardon me, the little fierce one!'

And then, when she was made to perceive that her husband would have to
fight alone, and could not take her with him to share his triumphs or
bind his wounds, at least not except by bringing her in contact with
Henry of Navarre and that atmosphere of the old court, she acquiesced
the more readily. She was a woman who could feel but not reason; and,
though she loved Nid de Merle, and had been proud of it, Berenger's
description of the ill-used Sieur de Bellaise had the more effect on
her, because she well remembered the traditions whispered among the
peasants with whom her childhood had been passed, that the village
crones declared nothing had gone well with the place since the Bellaise
had been expelled, with a piteous tale of the broken-hearted lady, that
she had never till now understood.

For the flagrant injustice perpetrated on her uncle and cousin in the
settlement on Berenger and herself she cared little, thinking they had
pretty well repaid themselves, and not entering into Berenger's deeper
view, that this injustice was the more to be deplored as the occasion of
their guilt; but she had no doubt or question as to the grand stroke
of yielding up her claims on the estate to the Sieur de Bellaise. The
generosity of the deed struck her imagination, and if Berenger would
not lead her vassals to battle, she did not want them. There was no
difficulty with Sir Marmaduke; he only vowed that he liked Berenger's
wife all the better for being free of so many yards of French dirt
tacked to her petticoat, and Philip hated the remembrance of those red
sugar-loaf pinnacles far too much not to wish his brother to be rid of
them.

M. de Bellaise, when once he understood that restitution was intended,
astonished Sir Marmaduke by launching himself on Berenger's neck with
tears of joy; and Henry of Navarre, though sorry to lose such a partisan
as the young Baron, allowed that the Bellaise claims, being those of a
Catholic, might serve to keep out some far more dangerous person whom
the court party might select in opposition to an outlaw and a Protestant
like M. de Ribaumont.

'So you leave us,' he said in private to Berenger, to whom he had taken
a great liking. 'I cannot blame you for not casting your lot into such
a witch's caldron as this poor country. My friends think I dallied at
court like Rinaldo in Armida's garden. They do not understand that when
one hears the name of Bourbon one does not willingly make war with the
Crown, still less that the good Calvin left a doctrine bitter to the
taste and tough of digestion. Maybe, since I have been forced to add my
spoon to stir the caldron, it may clear itself; if so, you will remember
that you have rights in Normandy and Picardy.'

This was the royal farewell. Henry and his suite departed the next
morning, but the Duchess insisted on retaining her other guests till
Philip's cure should be complete. Meantime, Claude de Mericour had
written to his brother and arranged a meeting with him. He was now no
boy who could be coerced, but a staid, self-reliant, scholarly person,
with a sword by his side and an English passport to secure him, and his
brother did not regard him as quite the disgrace to his family he had at
first deemed him. He was at least no rebel; and though the law seemed to
French eyes infinitely beneath the dignity of a scion of nobility, still
it was something not to have him a heretic preacher, and to be able
at least to speak of him as betrothed to the sister of the Baron de
Ribaumont. Moreover, that Huguenot kinsman, whose extreme Calvinist
opinions had so nearly revolted Mericour, had died and left him all his
means, as the only Protestant in the family; and the amount, when Claude
arranged matters with his brother, proved to be sufficient to bear him
through his expenses handsomely as a student, with the hope of marriage
so soon as he should have kept his terms at the Temple.

And thus the good ship THROSTLE bore home the whole happy party to
Weymouth, and good Sir Marmaduke had an unceasing cause for exultation
in the brilliant success of his mission to France.

After all, the first to revisit that country was no other than the
once homesick Philip. He wearied of inaction, and thought his county
neighbours ineffably dull and lubberly, while they blamed him for being
a fine, Frenchified gentleman, even while finding no fault with their
old friend Berenger, or that notable little, lively, housewifely lady
his wife, whose broken English and bright simplicity charmed every one.
Sorely Philip needed something to do; he might have been a gentleman
pensioner, but he had no notion, he said, of loitering after a lady to
boat and hunt, when such a king as Henry of Navarre was in the field;
and he agreed with Eustacie in her estimate of the court, that it was
horribly dull, and wanting in all the sparkle and brilliancy that even
he had perceived at Paris.

Eustacie gladly retreated to housewifery at Combe Walwyn, but a
strenuous endeavour on Lady Thistlewood's part to marry her stepson to a
Dorset king's daughter, together with the tidings of the renewed war in
France, spurred Philip into writing permission from his father to join
the King of Navarre as a volunteer.

Years went by, and Philip was only heard of in occasional letters,
accompanied by presents to his sisters and to little Rayonette, and
telling of marches, exploits, and battles,--how he had taken a standard
of the League at Coutras, and how he had led a charge of pikemen at
Ivry, for which he received the thanks of Henry IV. But, though so near
home, he did not set foot on English ground till the throne of France
was secured to the hero of Navarre, and he had marched into Paris in
guise very unlike the manner he had left it.

Then home he came, a bronzed gallant-looking warrior, the pride of the
county, ready for repose and for aid to his father in his hearty
old age, and bearing with him a pressing invitation from the King
to Monsieur and Madame de Ribaumont to resume their rank at court.
Berenger, who had for many years only known himself as Lord Walwyn,
shook his head. 'I thank the King,' he said, 'but I am better content
to breed up my children as wholly English. He bade me to return when he
should have stirred the witch's caldron into clearness. Alas! all he
has done is to make brilliant colours shine on the vapour thereof. Nay,
Phil; I know your ardent love for him, and marvel not at it. Before he
joined the Catholic Church I trusted that he might have given truth to
the one party, and unity to the other; but when the clergy accepted him
with all his private vices, and he surrendered unconditionally, I lost
hope. I fear there is worse in store. Queen Catherine did her most fatal
work of evil when she corrupted Henry of Navarre.'

'If you say more, Berry, I shall be ready to challenge you!' said
Philip. 'When you saw him, you little knew the true king of souls that
he is, is greatness, or his love for his country.'

'Nay, I believe it; but tell me, Philip, did you not hint that you had
been among former friends--at Lucon, you said, I think?'

Philip's face changed. 'Yes; it was for that I wished to see you alone.
My troop had to occupy the place. I had to visit the convent to arrange
for quartering my men so as least to scandalize the sisters. The Abbess
came to speak to me. I knew her only by her eyes! She is changed--aged,
wan, thin with their discipline and fasts--but she once or twice
smiled as she alone in old times could smile. The place rings with her
devotion, her charity, her penances, and truly her face is'--he could
hardly speak--'like that of a saint. She knew me at once, asked for
you all, and bade me tell you that NOW she prays for you and yours
continually, and blesses you for having opened to her the way of peace.
Ah! Berry, I always told you she had not her equal.'

'Think you so even now?'

'How should I not, when I have seen what repentance has made of her?'

'So!' said Berenger, rather sorrowfully, 'our great Protestant champion
has still left his heart behind in a French convent.'

'Stay, Berenger! do you remember yonder villain conjurer's prediction
that I should wed none but a lady whose cognizance was the leopard?'

'And you seem bent on accomplishing it,' said Berenger.

'Nay, but in another manner--that which you devised on the spur of
the moment. Berenger, I knew the sorcerer spake sooth when that little
moonbeam child of yours brought me the flowers from the rampart. I had
speech with her last night. She has all the fair loveliness that belongs
of right to your mother's grandchild, but her eye, blue as it is, has
the Ribaumont spirit; the turn of the head and the smile are what I
loved long ago in yonder lady, and, above all, she is her own sweet
self. Berenger, give me your daughter Berangere, and I ask no portion
with her but the silver bullet. Keep the pearls for your son's heirloom;
all I ask with Rayonette is the silver bullet.'


THE END












End of Project Gutenberg's The Chaplet of Pearls, by Charlotte M. Yonge

