"I yield myself," said the Euphuist, "reserving my right to defy my Lord
of Murray and my Lord of Morton to single duel, even as one gentleman
may demand satisfaction of another."

"You shall not want those who will answer your challenge, Sir Knight,"
replied Morton, "without aspiring to men above thine own degree."

"And where am I to find these superlative champions," said the English
knight, "whose blood runs more pure than that of Piercie Shafton?"

"Here is a flight for you, my lord!" said Murray.

"As ever was flown by a wild-goose," said Stawarth Bolton, who had now
approached to the front of the party.

"Who dared to say that word?" said the Euphuist, his face crimson with
rage.

"Tut! man," said Bolton, "make the best of it, thy mother's father was
but a tailor, old Overstitch of Holderness--Why, what! because thou art
a misproud bird, and despiseth thine own natural lineage, and rufflest
in unpaid silks and velvets, and keepest company with gallants and
cutters, must we lose our memory for that? Thy mother, Moll Overstitch,
was the prettiest wench in those parts--she was wedded by wild Shafton
of Wilverton, who men say, was akin to the Piercie on the wrong side of
the blanket."

"Help the knight to some strong waters," said Morton; "he hath fallen
from such a height, that he is stunned with the tumble."

In fact, Sir Piercie Shafton looked like a man stricken by a
thunderbolt, while, notwithstanding the seriousness of the scene
hitherto, no one of those present, not even the Abbot himself, could
refrain from laughing at the rueful and mortified expression of his
face.

"Laugh on," he said at length, "laugh on, my masters," shrugging his
shoulders; "it is not for me to be offended--yet would I know full fain
from that squire who is laughing with the loudest, how he had discovered
this unhappy blot in an otherwise spotless lineage, and for what purpose
he hath made it known?"

"_I_ make it known?" said Halbert Glendinning, in astonishment,--for to
him this pathetic appeal was made,--"I never heard the thing till this
moment."

[Footnote: The contrivance of provoking the irritable vanity of Sir
Piercie Shafton, by presenting him with a bodkin, indicative of his
descent from a tailor, is borrowed from a German romance, by the
celebrated Tieck, called Das Peter Manchem, _i. e._ The Dwarf Peter. The
being who gives name to the tale, is the Burg-geist, or castle spectre,
of a German family, whom he aids with his counsel, as he defends their
castle by his supernatural power. But the Dwarf Peter is so unfortunate
an adviser, that all his counsels, though producing success in the
immediate results, are in the issue attended with mishap and with guilt.
The youthful baron, the owner of the haunted castle, falls in love with
a maiden, the daughter of a neighbouring count, a man of great pride,
who refuses him the hand of the young lady, on account of his own
superiority of descent. The lover, repulsed and affronted, returns to
take counsel with the Dwarf Peter, how he may silence the count, and
obtain the victory in the argument, the next time they enter on the
topic of pedigree. The dwarf gives his patron or pupil a horse-shoe,
instructing him to give it to the count when he is next giving
himself superior airs on the subject of his family. It has the effect
accordingly. The count, understanding it as an allusion to a misalliance
of one of his ancestors with the daughter of a blacksmith, is thrown
into a dreadful passion with the young lover, the consequences of which
are the seduction of the young lady, and the slaughter of her father.

If we suppose the dwarf to represent the corrupt part of human
nature,--that "law in our members which wars against the law of our
minds,"--the work forms an ingenious allegory.]

"Why, did not that old rude soldier learn it from thee?" said the
knight, in increasing amazement.

"Not I, by Heaven!" said Bolton; "I never saw the youth in my life
before."

"But you _have_ seen him ere now, my worthy master," said Dame
Glendinning, bursting in her turn from the crowd. "My son, this is
Stawarth Bolton, he to whom we owe life, and the means of preserving
it--if he be a prisoner, as seems most likely, use thine interest with
these noble lords to be kind to the widow's friend."

"What, my Dame of the Glen!" said Bolton, "thy brow is more withered, as
well as mine, since we met last, but thy tongue holds the touch better
than my arm. This boy of thine gave me the foil sorely this morning. The
Brown Varlet has turned as stout a trooper as I prophesied; and where is
White Head?"

"Alas!" said the mother, looking down, "Edward has taken orders, and
become a monk of this Abbey."

"A monk and a soldier!--Evil trades both, my good dame. Better have
made one a good master fashioner, like old Overstitch, of Holderness. I
sighed when I envied you the two bonny children, but I sigh not now to
call either the monk or the soldier mine own. The soldier dies in the
field, the monk scarce lives in the cloister."

"My dearest mother," said Halbert, "where is Edward--can I not speak
with him?"

"He has just left us for the present," said Father Philip, "upon a
message from the Lord Abbot."

"And Mary, my dearest mother?" said Halbert.--Mary Avenel was not far
distant, and the three were soon withdrawn from the crowd, to hear and
relate their various chances of fortune.

While the subordinate personages thus disposed of themselves, the Abbot
held serious discussion with the two Earls, and, partly yielding to
their demands, partly defending himself with skill and eloquence,
was enabled to make a composition for his Convent, which left it
provisionally in no worse situation than before. The Earls were the more
reluctant to drive matters to extremity, since he protested, that if
urged beyond what his conscience would comply with, he would throw the
whole lands of the Monastery into the Queen of Scotland's hands, to be
disposed of at her pleasure. This would not have answered the views of
the Earls, who were contented, for the time, with a moderate sacrifice
of money and lands. Matters being so far settled, the Abbot became
anxious for the fate of Sir Piercie Shafton, and implored mercy in his
behalf.

"He is a coxcomb," he said, "my lords, but he is a generous, though a
vain fool; and it is my firm belief you have this day done him more pain
than if you had run a poniard into him."

"Run a needle into him you mean, Abbot," said the Earl of Morton; "by
mine honour, I thought this grandson of a fashioner of doublets was
descended from a crowned head at least!"

"I hold with the Abbot," said Murray; "there were little honour in
surrendering him to Elizabeth, but he shall be sent where he can do her
no injury. Our pursuivant and Bolton shall escort him to Dunbar, and
ship him off for Flanders.--But soft, here he comes, and leading a
female, as I think."

"Lords and others," said the English knight with great solemnity, "make
way for the Lady of Piercie Shafton--a secret which I listed not to make
known, till fate, which hath betrayed what I vainly strove to conceal,
makes me less desirous to hide that which I now announce to you."

"It is Mysie Happer, the Miller's daughter, on my life!" said Tibb
Tacket. "I thought the pride of these Piercies would have a fa'."

"It is indeed the lovely Mysinda," said the knight, "whose merits
towards her devoted servant deserved higher rank than he had to bestow."

"I suspect, though," said Murray, "that we should not have heard of the
Miller's daughter being made a lady, had not the knight proved to be the
grandson of a tailor."

"My lord," said Piercie Shafton, "it is poor valour to strike him
that cannot smite again; and I hope you will consider what is due to
a prisoner by the law of arms, and say nothing more on this odious
subject. When I am once more mine own man, I will find a new road to
dignity."

"_Shape_ one, I presume," said the Earl of Morton.

"Nay, Douglas, you will drive him mad,"--said Murray; "besides, we
have other matter in hand--I must see Warden wed Glendinning with Mary
Avenel, and put him in possession of his wife's castle without delay. It
will be best done ere our forces leave these parts."

"And I," said the Miller, "have the like grist to grind; for I hope some
one of the good fathers will wed my wench with her gay bridegroom."

"It needs not," said Shafton; "the ceremonial hath been solemnly
performed."

"It will not be the worse of another bolting," said the Miller; "it is
always best to be sure, as I say when I chance to take multure twice
from the same meal-sack."

"Stave the miller off him," said Murray, "or he will worry him dead.
The Abbot, my lord, offers us the hospitality of the Convent; I move we
should repair hither, Sir Piercie and all of us. I must learn to know
the Maid of Avenel--to-morrow I must act as her father--All Scotland
shall see how Murray can reward a faithful servant."

Mary Avenel and her lover avoided meeting the Abbot, and took up their
temporary abode in a house of the village, where next day their hands
were united by the Protestant preacher in presence of the two Earls.
On the same day Piercie Shafton and his bride departed, under an escort
which was to conduct him to the sea-side, and see him embark for the Low
Countries. Early on the following morning the bands of the Earls were
under march to the Castle of Avenel, to invest the young bridegroom
with the property of his wife, which was surrendered to them without
opposition.

But not without those omens which seemed to mark every remarkable event
which befell the fated family, did Mary take possession of the ancient
castle of her forefathers. The same warlike form which had appeared more
than once at Glendearg, was seen by Tibb Tacket and Martin, who returned
with their young mistress to partake her altered fortunes. It glided
before the cavalcade as they advanced upon the long causeway, paused
at each drawbridge, and flourished its hand, as in triumph, as it
disappeared under the gloomy archway, which was surmounted by the
insignia of the house of Avenel. The two trusty servants made their
vision only known to Dame Glendinning, who, with much pride of heart,
had accompanied her son to see him take his rank among the barons of the
land. "Oh, my dear bairn!" she exclaimed, when she heard the tale, "the
castle is a grand place to be sure, but I wish ye dinna a' desire to be
back in the quiet braes of Glendearg before the play be played out."
But this natural reflection, springing from maternal anxiety, was soon
forgotten amid the busy and pleasing task of examining and admiring the
new habitation of her son.

While these affairs were passing, Edward had hidden himself and his
sorrows in the paternal Tower of Glendearg, where every object was full
of matter for bitter reflection. The Abbot's kindness had despatched him
thither upon pretence of placing some papers belonging to the Abbey in
safety and secrecy; but in reality to prevent his witnessing the triumph
of his brother. Through the deserted apartments, the scene of so many
bitter reflections, the unhappy youth stalked like a discontented ghost,
conjuring up around him at every step new subjects for sorrow and for
self-torment. Impatient, at length, of the state of irritation and
agonized recollection in which he found himself, he rushed out and
walked hastily up the glen, as if to shake off the load which hung
upon his mind. The sun was setting when he reached the entrance of
Corri-nan-shian, and the recollection of what he had seen when he last
visited that haunted ravine, burst on his mind. He was in a humour,
however, rather to seek out danger than to avoid it.

"I will face this mystic being," he said; "she foretold the fate which
has wrapt me in this dress,--I will know whether she has aught else to
tell me of a life which cannot but be miserable."

He failed not to see the White Spirit seated by her accustomed haunt,
and singing in her usual low and sweet tone. While she sung, she seemed
to look with sorrow on her golden zone, which was now diminished to the
fineness of a silken thread.

  "Fare thee well, thou Holly green,
  Thou shall seldom now be seen,
  With all thy glittering garlands bending,
  As to greet my slow descending,
  Startling the bewilder'd hind.
  Who sees thee wave without a wind.

  "Farewell, Fountain! now not long
  Shalt thou murmur to my song,
  While thy crystal bubbles glancing,
  Keep the time in mystic dancing,
  Rise and swell, are burst and lost,
  Like mortal schemes by fortune crost.

  "The knot of fate at length is tied,
  The Churl is Lord, the Maid is bride.
  Vainly did my magic sleight
  Send the lover from her sight;
  Wither bush, and perish well,
  Fall'n is lofty Avenel!"

The vision seemed to weep while she sung; and the words impressed on
Edward a melancholy belief, that the alliance of Mary with his brother
might be fatal to them both.

       *       *       *       *       *

Here terminates the First Part of the Benedictine's Manuscript. I have
in vain endeavoured to ascertain the precise period of the story, as
the dates cannot be exactly reconciled with those of the most accredited
histories. But it is astonishing how careless the writers of Utopia are
upon these important subjects. I observe that the learned Mr. Laurence
Templeton, in his late publication entitled IVANHOE, has not only
blessed the bed of Edward the Confessor with an offspring unknown to
history, with sundry other solecisms of the same kind, but has inverted
the order of nature, and feasted his swine with acorns in the midst of
summer. All that can be alleged by the warmest admirer of this author
amounts to this,--that the circumstances objected to are just as true
as the rest of the story; which appears to me (more especially in the
matter of the acorns) to be a very imperfect defence, and that the
author will do well to profit by Captain Absolute's advice to his
servant, and never tell him more lies than are indispensably necessary.

                End of THE MONASTERY.










End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Monastery, by Sir Walter Scott

