Footnotes:


{1}  Richard's place of education was Bayeaux; for, as Duke William says
in the rhymed Chronicle of Normandy,--

    "Si a Roem le faz garder
    E norir, gaires longement
    Il ne saura parlier neiant
    Daneis, kar nul n l'i parole.
    Si voil qu'il seit a tele escole
    Qu l'en le sache endoctriner
    Que as Daneis sache parler.
    Ci ne sevent riens fors Romanz
    Mais a Baieux en a tanz
    Qui ne sevent si Daneis non."

{2}  Bernard was founder of the family of Harcourt of Nuneham.
Ferrieres, the ancestor of that of Ferrars.

{3}  In the same Chronicle, William Longsword directs that,--

    "Tant seit apris qu'il lise un bref
    Kar ceo ne li ert pas trop gref."

{4}  Hako of Norway was educated by Ethelstane of England.  It was
Foulques le Bon, the contemporary Count of Anjou, who, when derided by
Louis IV. for serving in the choir of Tours, wrote the following retort:
"The Count of Anjou to the King of France.  Apprenez, Monseigneur, qu'un
roi sans lettres est une ane couronne."

{5}  The Banner of Normandy was a cross till William the Conqueror
adopted the lion.

{6}

    "Sire, soies mon escus, soies mes defendemens."

    _Histoire des Ducs de Normandie_ (MICHEL).

{7}  The Cathedral was afterwards built by Richard himself.

{8}  Sus le maistre autel del iglise
Li unt sa feaute juree.

{9}

    Une clef d'argent unt trovee
    A sun braiol estreit noee.
    Tout la gent se merveillont
    Que cete clef signifiont.
    * * * *
    Ni la cuoule e l'estamine
    En aveit il en un archete,
    Que disfermeront ceste clavete
    De sol itant ert tresorier
    Kar nul tresor n'vait plus cher.

The history of the adventures of Jumieges is literally true, as is
Martin's refusal to admit the Duke to the cloister:--

    Dun ne t'a Deus mis e pose
    Prince gardain de sainte iglise
    E cur tenir leial justise.

{10}  An attack, in which Riouf, Vicomte du Cotentin, placed Normandy in
the utmost danger.  He was defeated on the banks of the Seine, in a field
still called the "Pre de Battaille," on the very day of Richard's birth;
so that the _Te Deum_ was sung at once for the victory and the birth of
the heir of Normandy.

{11}  "Biaus Segnors, vees chi vo segneur, je ne le vous voel tolir, mais
je estoie venus en ceste ville, prendre consel a vous, comment je poroie
vengier la mort son pere, qui me rapiela d'Engletiere.  Il me fist roi,
il me fist avoir l'amour le roi d'Alemaigne, il leva mon fil de fons, il
me fist toz les biens, et jou en renderai au fill le guerredon se je
puis."--MICHEL.

{12}  In a battle fought with Lothaire at Charmenil, Richard saved the
life of Walter the huntsman, who had been with him from his youth.

{13}  At fourteen years of age, Richard was betrothed to Eumacette of
Paris, then but eight years old.  In such esteem did Hugues la Blanc hold
his son-in-law, that, on his death-bed, he committed his son Hugues Capet
to his guardianship, though the Duke was then scarcely above twenty,
proposing him as the model of wisdom and of chivalry.

{14}  "Osmons, qui l'enfant enseognoit l'eu mena i jour en riviere, et
quant il revint, la reine Gerberge dist que se il jamais l'enmenait fors
des murs, elle li ferait les jeix crever."--MICHEL.

{15}  "Gules, two wings conjoined in lure, or," is the original coat of
St. Maur, or Seymour, said to be derived from Osmond de Centeville, who
assumed them in honour of his flight with Duke Richard.  His direct
descendants in Normandy were the Marquises of Osmond, whose arms were
gules, two wings ermine.  In 1789 there were two survivors of the line of
Centeville, one a Canon of Notre Dame, the other a Chevalier de St.
Louis, who died childless.

{16}  Harald of Norway, who made a vow never to trim his hair till he had
made himself sole king of the country.  The war lasted ten years, and he
thus might well come to deserve the title of Horrid-locks, which was
changed to that of Harfagre, or fair-haired, when he celebrated his final
victory, by going into a bath at More, and committing his shaggy hair to
be cut and arranged by his friend Jarl Rognwald, father of Rollo.

{17}  Richard obtained for Arnulf the restitution of Arras, and several
other Flemish towns.  He died eight years afterwards, in 996, leaving
several children, among whom his daughter Emma is connected with English
history, by her marriage, first, with Ethelred the Unready, and secondly,
with Knute, the grandson of his firm friend and ally, Harald Blue-tooth.
His son was Richard, called the Good; his grandson, Robert the
Magnificent; his great-grandson, William the Conqueror, who brought the
Norman race to England.  Few names in history shine with so consistent a
lustre as that of Richard; at first the little Duke, afterwards Richard
aux longues jambes, but always Richard sans peur.  This little sketch has
only brought forward the perils of his childhood, but his early manhood
was likewise full of adventures, in which he always proved himself brave,
honourable, pious, and forbearing.  But for these our readers must search
for themselves into early French history, where all they will find
concerning our hero will only tend to exalt his character.




