to receive from him an apology for the letter he had sent to the
newspaper. In time there reached me this inadequate and disingenuous
response, hardly worthy to be called even an apology for an apology:

    "In reply to your courteous communication, let me say that had I
    seen the close of your short story, I should have grasped the
    situation more fully, and should doubtless have refrained from
    giving it any special attention.

    "When one considers, however, the manner in which your copy was
    published by the paper, deferring the explanation until the
    appearance of the third instalment, it must be acknowledged that
    there was opportunity for surprise and criticism. The fault should
    have been found with the way in which the article was published,
    rather than with the story itself, that appearing at its conclusion
    a self-confessed mosaic of quotations. Needless to add that its
    author's aim to amuse, entertain, and instruct has been manifestly
    subserved.

    "Yours most sincerely,

    "---- ----"

Of another tale ('Sixteen Years without a Birthday') I have nothing to
say--except to record a friend's remark after he had finished it, that
he had "read something very like it not long before in a newspaper;" so
perhaps I may be permitted to declare that I had not read something
very like it anywhere, but had, to the best of my belief, "made it all
up out of my own head." Nor need I say anything about the 'Rival
Ghosts'--except to note that it is here reprinted from an earlier
collection of stories which has now for years been out of print.

The last tale of all, the 'Twinkling of an Eye,' received the second
prize for the best detective story, offered by a newspaper
syndicate--the first prize being taken by a story written by Miss Mary
E. Wilkins and Mr. J. E. Chamberlain. The use of the camera as a
detective agency had been suggested to me by a brief newspaper
paragraph glanced at casually several years before. And I confess that
it was with not a little amusement that I employed this device, since I
had then recently seen my 'Vignettes of Manhattan' criticized as being
"photographic in method." Here again I had no reason to doubt the
originality of my plot; and here once more was my confidence shattered,
and I was forced to confess that fiction can never hope to keep ahead
of fact.

After the 'Twinkling of an Eye' was published in the newspapers which
had joined in offering the prizes, it was printed again in one of the
smaller magazines. There it was read by a gentleman connected with a
hardware house in Grand Rapids, who wrote to me, informing me that the
story I had laboriously pieced together had--in some of its details, at
least--been anticipated by real life more than a year before I sat down
to write out my narrative. This gentleman has now kindly given me
permission to quote from his letter those passages which may be of
interest to readers of the 'Twinkling of an Eye':

It appears that the cash-drawer of the hardware store, in which small
change was habitually left over night for use in the morning before the
banks open, was robbed three nights running, although only a few
dollars were taken at a time. "The large vault, in which are kept the
firm's papers, had not been tampered with, and the work was evidently
that of some petty thief. The night-watchman was a trusted employee,
and my father did not wish to accuse him unjustly. And, besides, he did
not wish to warn the thief. So nothing was said to the watchman. The
nights on which the till had been tapped were Thursday, Friday, and
Saturday. Father goes down to the store every Sunday morning for about
half an hour to open the mail, and it was then that he discovered the
Saturday night theft. Directly after Sunday dinner, father went down to
see an electrical friend of his, who executed a plan which my father
had devised. The cash-drawer was situated in one corner of the office
(quite a large one), in which both the wholesale and retail business is
transacted. He placed a large detective camera in the corner opposite
the till, and beside it, and a little behind, a quantity of flash-light
powder in a receptacle. This powder was connected by electric wires
with the till in such a manner, that when the drawer was opened the
circuit would be completed and the powder ignited. Everything worked to
perfection. The office is always left dark at night, so the shutter of
the camera could be left open without spoiling the film. The camera was
in place Sunday evening, but the thief stayed away. It was set again on
Monday night, and that time we got him. A small wire was attached to a
weight near the camera extending to the till. As the thief started to
open the drawer the weight made a slight noise. He glanced in the
direction of the noise, started, pulled the weight a little farther,
and we had his picture. Detectives had already been working on the
case, and the thief was identified and arrested on the strength of the
portrait. When he was informed that we had his picture, he made a full
confession. He said that when the flash-light went off he nearly
fainted from fright."

                     *      *      *      *      *

After this experience I am tempted to give up all hope that I can ever
invent anything which is not a fact, even before I make it up. I am now
prepared, therefore, to discover that I did really have an interview
with Count Cagliostro, and also that I was actually an unwilling
witness at the wedding of the rival ghosts.

(1896.)


THE END






End of Project Gutenberg's Tales of Fantasy and Fact, by Brander Matthews

