[Footnote 691: Such procedure has not received much countenance in
Christian mysticism but the contemplation of a burnished pewter dish and
of running water induced ecstasy in Jacob Boehme and Ignatius Loyola
respectively. See Underhill, _Mysticism_, p. 69.]

[Footnote 692: Maj. Nik. 62 end.]

[Footnote 693: The analysis means to analyze all things as consisting
alike of the four elements. The one perception is the perception that
all nourishment is impure.]

[Footnote 694: See Dig. Nik. 13 and Rhys Davids' introduction to it. In
spite of their name, they seem to be purely Buddhist and have not been
found in Brahmanic literature. The four states are characterized
respectively by love, sympathy with sorrow, sympathy with joy, and
equanimity.]

[Footnote 695: Dig. Nik. XIII. 76.]

[Footnote 696: Dig. Nik. XVII. 2-4.]

[Footnote 697: Christian mystics also, such as St Angela and St Theresa,
had "formless visions." See Underhill, _Myst._ pp. 338 ff.]

[Footnote 698: Attha vimokkha. See Mahaparinib. sut. in Rhys Davids'
_Dialogues of the Buddha,_ II. 119.]

[Footnote 699: Akincannayatanam.]

[Footnote 700: Nevasannanasannayatanam.]

[Footnote 701: Sannavedayita nirodhasamapatti. The Buddha when dying
(Dig. XVI. V. 8, 9) passes through this state, but does not go from it
to Parinibbana. This perhaps means that it was regarded as a
purification of the mind, but not on the direct road to the final goal.]

[Footnote 702: See Maj. Nik. 43. But the point of the discussion seems
to be not so much special commendation of this form of trance as an
explanation of its origin, namely that it, like other mental states, is
bound to ensue when certain preliminary conditions both moral and
intellectual have been realized. See also Sam. Nik. XXXVI. ii. 5. See
for examples of this cataleptic form of Samadhi Max Mueller's _Life of
Ramakrishna_, pp. 49,59, etc. Christian mystics (_e.g._ St Catharine of
Siena and St Theresa) were also subject to deathlike trances lasting for
hours and St Theresa is said once to have been in this condition for
some days.]

[Footnote 703: Maj. Nik. 86.]

[Footnote 704: This is known to European mystics, particularly Suso. St
Francis of Assisi, St Catharine of Siena and Richard Rolle are also
cited. See Underhill. _Mysticism_, p. 332.]

[Footnote 705: Christian visions of Hell, Purgatory and Paradise are
another instance of the divine eye, which thinks it can see the whole
scheme of things.]

[Footnote 706: Tales about such powers, are still very common in the
East, for instance the Chinese story (in the _Liao Chai_) of the man who
learnt from a Taoist how to walk through a wall but failed ignominiously
when he tried to give an exhibition to his family. Educated Chinese seem
to think there is something in the story and say that he failed because
his motives were bad.]

[Footnote 707: Bernheim, _La Suggestion_, chap. I. Quand j'ai eloigne de
son esprit la preoccupation que fait naitre l'idee de magnetisme ... je
lui dis "Regardez-moi bien et ne songez qu'a dormir. Vous allez sentir
une lourdeur dans les paupieres, une fatigue dans vos yeux: ils
clignotent, ils vont se mouiller; la vue devient confuse: ils se
ferment." Quelques sujets ferment les yeux et dorment immediatement....
_C'est le sommeil par la suggestion, c'est l'image du sommeil_ que je
suggere, que j'insinue dans le cerveau. Les passes, la fixation des yeux
ou des doigts de l'operateur, propres seulement a concentrer
l'attention, ne sont pas absolument necessaires.]

[Footnote 708: Thus in the drama Ratnavali a magician makes the
characters see an imaginary conflagration of the palace and also a
vision of heaven. His performance seems to be accepted as merely a
remarkable piece of conjuring.]

[Footnote 709: Ang. Nik. xvi. 1. In spite of his magic power he could
not prevent himself being murdered. The Milinda-Panha explains this as
the result of Karma, which is stronger than magic and everything else.]

[Footnote 710: _E.g._ Maj. Nik. 77. ]

[Footnote 711: Cullavag. v. 8.]

[Footnote 712: Dig. Nik. xi.]

[Footnote 713: Visuddhi Magga, xii. in Warren, _Buddhism in
Translation_, pp. 315 ff.]

[Footnote 714: R.V. II. 12. 5.]

[Footnote 715: Yet Tennyson can say "And at their feet the crocus brake
like fire," but in a mythological poem.]

[Footnote 716: Mahav. V. i.]

[Footnote 717: E.g. Dig. Nik. XI. and Cullavag. V. 8.]

[Footnote 718: Even in the Upanishads the gods are not given a very high
position. They are powerless against Brahman (e.g. Kena Up. 14-28) and
are not naturally in possession of true knowledge, though they may
acquire it (e.g. Chand. Up. VIII. 7).]

[Footnote 719: Dig. Nik. XI.]

[Footnote 720: Dig. Nik. I. chap. 2, 1-6. The radiant gods are the
Abhassara, cf. Dhammap 200.]

[Footnote 721: Watters, II. p. 160.]

[Footnote 722: The legends of both Rama and Krishna occur in the _Book
of Jatakas_ in a somewhat altered form, nos. 641 and 454.]

[Footnote 723: Thus Helios the Sun passes into St Elias.]

[Footnote 724: He is often called Brahma Sahampati, a title of doubtful
meaning and not found in Brahmanic writings. The Pitakas often speak of
Brahmas and worlds of Brahma in the plural, as if there were a whole
class of Brahmas. See especially the Suttas collected in book I, chap.
vi. of the Samyutta-Nikaya where we even hear of Pacceka Brahmas,
apparently corresponding in some way to Pacceka Buddhas.]

[Footnote 725: Maj. Nik. 49. The meaning of the title Baka is not clear
and may be ironical. Another ironical name is manopadosika (debauched in
mind) invented as the title of a class of gods in Dig. Nik. I. and XX.
The idea that sages can instruct the gods is anterior to Buddhism, See
e.g. Brihad-Ar. Up. II. 5. 17, and ib. IV. 3. 33, and the parallel
passage in the Tait. Chand. Kaush. Upanishads and Sat. Brahmana for the
idea that a Srotriya is equal to the highest deities.]

[Footnote 726: Six Manvantaras of the present Kalpa have elapsed and we
are in the seventh.]

[Footnote 727: We are in the Kali or worst age of the present mahayuga.
The Kali lasts 432,000 years and began 3102 B.C.

In their number and in many other points of cosmography the various
accounts differ greatly. The account given above is taken from the
Vishnu Purana, book II. but the details in it are not entirely
consistent.]

[Footnote 728: The detailed formulation of this cosmography was
naturally gradual but its chief features are known to the Nikayas. Dig.
Nik. XIV. 17 and 30 seem to imply the theory of spheres. For Heavens,
see Maj. Nik. 49, Dig. Nik. XI. 68-79 and for Hells Sut. Nip. III. 10,
Maj. Nik. 129. See too De la Vallee Poussin's article, _Cosmology
Buddhist_, in _E.R.E._]

[Footnote 729: See for the Asuras Sam. Nik. I. xi. 1.]

[Footnote 730: See a Tibetan representation in Waddell's _Buddhism of
Tibet_, p. 79.]

[Footnote 731: The question of whether the universe is infinite in space
or not is according to the Pitakas one of those problems which cannot be
answered.]

[Footnote 732: Dig. Nik. XXVII.]

[Footnote 733: Maro papima. See especially Windisch, _Mara and Buddha_,
1895, and Sam. Nik. I. iv.]

[Footnote 734: We sometimes hear of Maras in the plural. Like Brahma he
is sometimes a personality, sometimes the type of a class of gods. We
also hear that he has obtained his present exalted though not virtuous
post by his liberality in former births. Thus, like Sakka and other
Buddhist Devas, Mara is really an office held by successive occupants.
He is said to be worshipped by some Tibetan sects. It is possible that
the legends about Mara and his daughters and about Krishna and the Gopis
may have a common origin for Mara is called Kanha (the Prakrit
equivalent of Krishna) in Sutta-Nipata, 439.]

[Footnote 735: Ang. Nik. III. 35.]

[Footnote 736: This seems to be the correct doctrine, though it is hard
to understand how the popular idea of continual torture is compatible
with the performance of good deeds. The Katha-vatthu, XIII. 2, states
that a man in purgatory can do good. See too Ang. Nik. 1. 19.]

[Footnote 737: But even the language of the Pitakas is not always quite
correct on this point, for it represents evil-doers as falling down
straight into hell.]

[Footnote 738: Khud. Path. 7. In this poem, the word Peta (Sk. Preta)
seems to be used as equivalent to departed spirits, not necessarily
implying that they are undergoing punishment. In the _Questions of
Milinda_ (IV. 8. 29) the practice of making offerings on behalf of the
dead is countenanced, and it is explained exactly what classes of dead
profit by them. On the other hand the Katha-vatthu states that the dead
do not benefit by gifts given in this world, but two sects, the
Rajagirika and Siddhattika, are said by the commentary to hold the
contrary view.]

[Footnote 739: See Max Mueller's _Ramakrishna_, p. 40, for another
instance.]

[Footnote 740: In a passage of the Mahaparinib. Sut. (III. 22) which is
probably not very early the Buddha says that when he mixes with gods or
men he takes the shape of his auditors, so that they do not know him.]

[Footnote 741: Sam. Nik. II. 3. 10. Sadevakassa lokassa aggo.]

[Footnote 742: E.g. in the Lotus Sutra.]

[Footnote 743: One hundred and eight marks on the sole of each foot are
also enumerated in later writings.]

[Footnote 744: Artaxerxes Longimanus. Cf. the Russian princely name
Dolgorouki. The Chinese also attribute forty-nine physical signs of
perfection to Confucius, including long arms. See Dore, _Recherches sur
les Superstitions en Chine_, vol. XIII. pp. 2-6.]

[Footnote 745: Though Brahmans are represented as experts in these
marks, it seems likely that the idea of the Mahapurusha was popular
chiefly among the Kshatriyas, for in one form, at any rate, it teaches
that a child of the warrior caste born with certain marks will become
either a universal monarch or a great teacher of the truth. This notion
must have been most distasteful to the priestly caste.]

[Footnote 746: See Dig. Nik. 3. The Lakkhana Suttanta (Dig. Nik. 30)
contains a discussion of the marks.]

[Footnote 747: See Dik. Nig. 14, Mahapadanasutta: Therag. 490; Sam. Nik.
XII. 4-10.]

[Footnote 748: Maj. Nik. 50, Maratajjaniyasuttam.]

[Footnote 749: Dig. Nik. 14.]

[Footnote 750: Maj. Nik. 123. See also Dig. Nik. 14.]

[Footnote 751: More literally that he knows exactly how his feelings,
etc., arise, continue and pass away and is not swayed by wandering
thoughts and desires.]

[Footnote 752: Three extra Buddhas are sometimes mentioned but are
usually ignored because they did not, like the others, come into contact
with Gotama in his previous births.]

[Footnote 753: E.g. Ang. Nik. III. 15 and the Maha-Sudassana Sutta (Dig.
Nik. X.) in which the Buddha says he has been buried at Kusinara no less
than six times.]

[Footnote 754: Dig. Nik. XVI. v. 15.]

[Footnote 755: The two kinds of Buddhas are defined in the
Puggala-Pannatti, IX. 1. For details about Pratyeka-Buddhas see De La
Vallee Poussin's article in _E.R.E._]

[Footnote 756: Thus in Dig. Nik. XVI. 5. 12 they are declared worthy of
a Dagaba or funeral monument and Sam. Nik. III. 2. 10 declares the
efficacy of alms given to them.]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Hinduism and Buddhism, Vol I. (of 3)
by Charles Eliot

