
[590:2] Justin Martyr, Opera, p. 99.

[590:3] In the days of Origen the episcopal office was not unfrequently
coveted for its wealth. Origen, Opera, iii. p. 501. See also Cyprian,
Epist. lxiv. p. 240.

[591:1] Comment, in Matt., Opera, iii. p. 723.

[591:2] See Period II. sec. i. chap. v. p. 354.

[592:1] Euseb. vi. 43.

[592:2] Tertullian, "Praescrip. Haeret." c. 41. This office, even in the
fourth century, was often committed to mere children--a sad proof that
the importance of reading the Word effectively was not duly appreciated.

[592:3] Origen makes mention of them, Opera, ii. p. 453; and Firmilian,
Cyprian, Epist. 1xxv. p. 306.

[592:4] Cyprian, Epist. lii. p. 150.

[592:5] As in the case of Fabian of Rome. Euseb. vi. 29.

[593:1] Bingham, i. 356, 359.

[593:2] Cyprian, Epist. lv. pp. 177, 178; xl. pp. 119, 120.

[593:3] Epist. xxxiii. p. 105.

[594:1] Epist. xxiv. pp. 79, 80.

[594:2] Epist. xxxiv. pp. 107, 108.

[594:3] Epist. xxxv. p. 111.

[595:1] Bishops and presbyters appear to have continued to ordain
bishops in the time of Origen. His "Commentaries on Matthew," written
according to his Benedictine editor in A.D. 245 (see Delarue's "Origen,"
iii. Praef.), speak of _bishops and presbyters_ "committing whole
churches to unfit persons and _constituting incompetent
governors_."--_Opera_, iii. p. 753.

[595:2] It would appear that the five presbyters who opposed Cyprian
constituted the majority of the presbytery. Cyprian, Epist. xl. pp. 119,
120. See also Sage's "Vindication of the Principles of the Cyprianic
Age," p. 348.

[595:3] Euseb. vi. 29.

[596:1] Cyprian, Epist. xxxi. pp. 99, 100.

[596:2] Cyprian, Epist. iv. p. 31.

[596:3] Cyprian, Epist. xxxiii. p. 106, xxxiv. p. 107, lviii. p. 207,
lxxi. p. 271, lxxvii. p. 327. Euseb. vii. 5.

[596:4] Thus we find him going so far as to complain that his presbyters
"with contempt and dishonour of the bishop arrogate sole authority to
themselves."--_Epist._ ix. p. 48.

[596:5] Epist. xlix. p. 143. See Neander's "General History," i. 307,
and Burton's "Lectures on the Ecc. Hist, of the First Three Centuries,"
ii. 331. Burton repudiates the attempts of Bingham and others to explain
away this proceeding.

[597:1] They are called so for the first time in the Council of Ancyra.
They had before always been called simply bishops. It has been remarked
that we never find any _chorepiscopi_ among the African bishops, though
many of them occupied as humble a position as those so designated
elsewhere.

[597:2] Canon xiii., "Canones Apost. et Concil. Berolini," 1839.

[598:1] In the case of Novatian. Euseb. vi. 43.

[599:1] These presbyters were called _Doctores_. Cyprian, Epist. xxxiv.
p. 80.

[599:2] It would appear that, even at the time of the Council of
Carthage held A.D. 397, a bishop had sometimes only one presbyter under
his care. See Dupin's account of the Council.

[599:3] Bingham, i. 198; and Beveridge, "Cotelerius," tom. ii. App. p.
17.

[600:1] See Period II. sec. i. chap. ii. p. 302, and p. 355.

[601:1] Euseb. vi. 43.

[601:2] Bunsen's "Hippolytus," iii. 50. Another canon says--"_He who is
worthy out of the bishops_ ... putteth his hand upon him whom they have
made bishop, praying over him."--Bunsen, iii. 42.

[601:3] See chapter viii. of this section, pp. 565, 567.

[602:1] Bunsen, iii. 111.

[602:2] Euseb. viii. 1.

[603:1] The following observation of a distinguished writer of the
Church of England is well worthy of consideration. "The remains of
ancient ecclesiastical literature, especially those of the Latin Church,
teach us that the corruption of Christianity of which Romanism is the
full development, manifested itself, in the first instance, _not in the
doctrines which relate to the spiriting life of the individual_, but in
those connected with _the constitution and authority_ of the Christian
society."--_Litton's Church of Christ_, p. 12.

[604:1] "Can. Apost." xiv. "Concil. Nic." xv.

[604:2] Euseb. "Martyrs of Palestine," c. 12.

[604:3] Euseb. viii. i.

[605:1] Acts xxvi. 16-18.

[605:2] Such was the case with the churches mentioned Acts xiv. 23, and
Titus i. 5.

[606:1] Trajan regarded with great suspicion all associations, even fire
brigades and charitable societies. See Pliny's "Letters," book x.,
letters 43 and 94.

[607:1] Such as Mosheim, "Instit." i. 149, 150; Neander, "General
History," i. 281.

[607:2] During the first forty years of the second century Gnosticism
did not excite much notice, and as the Church courts must have been
occupied chiefly with matters of mere routine, it is not remarkable that
their proceedings have not been recorded.

[607:3] We have no contemporary evidence to prove that _ordinations_
took place in the former half of the second century, and yet we cannot
doubt their occurrence.

[608:1] Acts xx. 17.

[608:2] "In Mileto enim convocatis episcopis et presbyteris, qui erant
ab Epheso et a reliquis proximis civitatibus."--_Contra Haeres_, iii. c.
14. Sec. 2.

[608:3] Cyprian, Epist. lxviii. Sec. 256.

[608:4] The new bishop was often chosen before the interment of his
predecessor; and even when the senior elder was the president, it is
probable that the neighbouring pastors assembled to attend the funeral
of the deceased pastor, and to be present at the inauguration of his
successor.

[609:1] See Chapter vi. of this Section, p. 524.

[609:2] The old writer called Praedestinatus speaks of several synods
held in reference to the Gnostics before the middle of the second
century. He may have had access to some documents now lost, but the
testimony of a witness who lived in the fifth or sixth century is not of
much value.

[610:1] "In toto orbe decretum est ut unus de presbyteris electus
superponeretur caeteris."--_Com. in Titum_.

[610:2] Euseb. v. 16.

[610:3] See Routh's "Reliquiae," ii. 183, 195.

[611:1] Mosheim ("Commentaries" by Vidal, ii. 105) has made a vain
attempt to set aside the Latin translation of this passage by Valesius,
as he saw that it completely upsets his favourite theory. But any one
who carefully examines the Greek of Eusebius may see that the rendering
complained of is quite correct. It cannot be necessary to point out to
the intelligent reader the transparent sophistry of nearly all that
Mosheim has written on this subject.

[611:2] Euseb. v. 23.

[612:1] See Period II. sec. iii. chap. v. p. 509.

[612:2] Tertullian, "De Jejun," c. xiii.

[613:1] "Aguntur praeterea _per Graecias_ illa certis in locis concilia
ex universis ecclesiis."

[613:2] "Ipsa repraesentatio totius nominis Christiani magna veneratione
celebratur." Mosheim argues from these words that the bishops attended
these assemblies, not by right of office, but as _representatives of the
people_! He might, with more plausibility, have contended that they were
held only once a year. "Ista _sollemnia_ quibus tunc praesens
patrocinatus est sermo."

[614:1] Euseb. v. 24. Hippolytus complains of a bishop of Rome that he
was "ignorant of the _ecclesiastical rules_,"--a plain proof, not only
that synods were in existence in the West, but also that a knowledge of
canon law was considered an important accomplishment. See Bunsen, ii.
223.

[614:2] Cyprian (Epist. lxxiii.) speaks of a large council held "many
years" before his time "under Agrippinus," one of his predecessors. This
bishop appears to have been contemporary with Tertullian.

[614:3] In his book "De Pudicitia," c. 10, he speaks of the "Pastor" of
Hermas as classed among apocryphal productions "_ab omni concilio
ecclesiarum_"--implying that it had been condemned by African councils,
as well as others.

[614:4] The prevalence of the Montanistic spirit in Asia Minor may
account for this.

[615:1] See Potter's "Antiquities of Greece," i. 106.

[615:2] See Mosheim's "Commentaries," cent. ii. sect. 22.

[616:1] "Per singulos annos seniores et praepositi in unum conveniamus."

[616:2] Cyprian, Epist. lxxv. pp. 302, 303.

[616:3] In Africa, however, this arrangement was not established even in
the fifth century. There, the senior bishop still continued president.

[617:1] This canon somewhat differs from the fifth of the Council of
Nice, as the latter requires the first meeting to be held "before Lent."
It is somewhat doubtful which canon is of higher antiquity.

[619:1] "Seniores et praepositi."--_Epist. Cypriani, Opera_, p. 302.

[619:2] "The Councils of the Church," by Rev. E.B. Pusey, D.D., p. 34
Oxford, 1857.

[619:3] Pusey, p. 58.

[619:4] Ibid. p. 66.

[619:5] Ibid. p. 95.

[619:6] As in the case of Athanasius at the Council of Nice.

[619:7] As witnesses and commissioners may still be heard by Church
courts.

[619:8] "Graviter commoti sumus ego et collegae mei qui praesentes
aderant et _compresbyteri nostri qui nobis assidebant"--Cyprian_, Epist.
lxvi. p. 245. "_Residentibus_ etiam viginti et sex _presbyteris,
adstantibus diaconibus et omni plebe."--Concil. Illiberit_.

[620:1] Euseb. vii. 30.

[621:1] Prov. xi. 14.

[621:2] Mosheim's "Institutes," by Soames, i. 150.

[624:1] See Mosheim's "Commentaries," cent. ii. sec. 39; American
edition by Murdock.

[624:2] Acts xxiv. 5.

[624:3] Euseb. iv. 5.

[625:1] The English name _Easter_ is derived from that of a Teutonic
goddess whose festival was celebrated by the ancient Saxons in the month
of April, and for which the Paschal feast was substituted.

[626:1] Pentecost, called Whitsunday or White-Sunday, on account of the
white garments worn by those who then received baptism, was observed as
early as the beginning of the third century. Origen, "Contra Celsum,"
book viii. Tertullian, "De Idololatria," c. 14. We have then no trace of
the observation of Christmas. See Kaye's "Tertullian," p. 413.

[626:2] See Mosheim's "Commentaries," by Murdock, cent. ii. sec. 71. Dr
Schaff seems disposed to deny this, but he assigns no reasons. See his
"Hist. of the Christ. Church," p. 374.

[626:3] Even as to this point there is not unanimity--some alleging that
our Lord partook of the Paschal lamb on the night preceding that on
which it was eaten by the Jews.

[627:1] This is distinctly asserted by Irenaeus. "Anicetus and Pius,
Hyginus with Telesphorus and Xystus, neither did themselves observe, nor
did they permit those after them to observe it. And yet though they
themselves did not keep it, they were not the less at peace with those
from churches where it was kept, whenever they came to them, although to
keep it then was so much the more in opposition to those who did
not."--_Euseb._ v. 24.

[629:1] It would appear that the Armenians, the Copts, and others, still
observe this rite. Mosheim's "Comment." cent. ii. sec. 71. As to the
continuance of this custom at Rome, see Bingham, v. 36, 37.

[629:2] Socrates, an ecclesiastical historian of the fifth century, has
expressed himself with remarkable candour on this subject. "It appears
to me," says he, "that neither the ancients nor moderns who have
affected to follow the Jews have had any rational foundation for
contending so obstinately about it (Easter). For they have altogether
lost sight of the fact that when our religion superseded the Jewish
economy, the obligation to observe the Mosaic law and the ceremonial
types ceased.... The Saviour and His apostles have enjoined us by no law
to keep this feast: nor in the New Testament are we threatened with any
penalty, punishment, or curse for the neglect of it, as the Mosaic law
does the Jews."--_Ecc. Hist._ v. c. 22.

[629:3] This system seems to have been in existence in the time of
Tertullian. See Tertullian, "Ad. Martyr." c. 1., and "De Pudicitia,"
c. 22.

[630:1] Cyprian speaks of a confessor spending his time "in drunkenness
and revealing," (_Epist._ vi. p. 37,) and of some guilty of "fraud,
fornication, and adultery." (_De Unit. Ecc._ p. 404.)

[630:2] Thus Cyprian says--"Lucianus, not only while Paulus was still in
prison, gave letters in his name _indiscriminately_ written with his own
hand, but _even after his decease_ continued to do the same in his name,
saying that he had been ordered to do so by Paulus."--_Epist._ xxii.
p. 77.

[630:3] Cyprian, Epist. x. p. 52.

[631:1] Apostasy in time of persecution was considered a mortal sin.
Adultery was placed in the same category. Cyprian, Epist. lii. p. 155.
At one time Cyprian himself held the sentiments of the stricter party.
See his "Scripture Testimonies against the Jews," book iii. Sec. 28, p. 563.

[633:1] Cyprian, Epist. lxxiii. p. 279, and lxxiv. p. 295.

[633:2] Cyprian, Epist. lxxiii. p. 277, 278.

[634:1] In Stieren's "Irenaeus," i. 824, there is a different reading of
this passage, according to which some continued the fast forty days.

[634:2] Euseb. v. 24.

[636:1] John x. 11, 27, 28.

[636:2] Eph. v. 25-27.

[636:3] Matt, xxviii. 20.

[636:4] 1 Pet. i. 5.

[636:5] Matt. xvi. 18.

[637:1] Eph. iv. 3.

[637:2] Eph. iv. 13.

[637:3] Eph. iv. 13.

[637:4] No writer since the Reformation has discussed the subject of the
Church with more learning and ability than the Rev. Dr Hodge of
Princeton. Those who wish to be thoroughly acquainted with all the
bearings of the question should consult his "Essays and Reviews," New
York, 1857. Also the "Princeton Review." See also an article of his
taken from the "Princeton Review" in the "British and Foreign
Evangelical Review" for Sept. 1854.

[637:5] Matt. xiii. 47-50.

[638:1] 1 Cor. i. 11, 12.

[638:2] Gal. i. 6, iii. 1.

[638:3] Rev. iii. 1.

[639:1] Thus, Melito of Sardis is said to have written a work "On the
Church." Euseb. iv. 26.

[639:2] Apostles' Creed. For another form see Bunsen's "Hippolytus,"
iii. 25, 27.

[640:1] 3 John 9, 10.

[640:2] He appears, for certain reasons now unknown, to have been
dissatisfied with some disciples who had been engaged in missionary
work; and he had influence sufficient to procure the excommunication of
the brethren who entertained them.

[640:3] He would be a bold man who would assert that all the pious
members of the Society of Friends are in a hopeless condition.

[641:1] Heb. xii. 23.

[641:2] See Rothe's "Anfange der Christlichen Kirche," p. 575.

[641:3] Cyprian, Epist. lxxvi. p. 316.

[641:4] Epist. lxix. p. 265.

[641:5] Epist. lxii. p. 221.

[642:1] "De Unit. Ecc." p. 397. See also Lactantius, "De Vera
Sapientia," lib. iv. p. 282.

[642:2] Eph. iv. 12.

[642:3] Acts xx. 32.

[643:1] Rev. i. 6.

[644:1] If our authorized version of the English Bible is to be regarded
as a standard of correct usage, the word priest cannot be properly
employed to designate a Christian minister. In the New Testament, as
stated in the text, a minister of the word is never called a _priest_
([Greek: hiereus]), and the latter term, when used in reference to an
official personage in our English Bible, always denotes an individual
_who offers sacrifice_. To call a gospel minister a priest is,
therefore, at once to adopt an incorrect expression and to insinuate a
false doctrine. The English word priest is derived, not as some say,
from the Greek [Greek: presbuteros] through the French _pretre_, but
from the Greek [Greek: proestos], in Latin _praestes_, and in Saxon
_preost_. See Webster's "Dictionary of the English Language."

[644:2] Epist. lxix. p. 264.

[644:3] Thus, Tertullian speaks of the "ordo sacerdotalis." "De Exhor.
Cast." c. vii.

[645:1] Cyprian, Epist. lxiii. p. 230; lxiv. p. 239.

[645:2] Cyprian, Epist. lxix. p. 264. Cotelerius, i. 442. The Eucharist
is called a sacrifice by Justin Martyr (see his Dialogue with Trypho.,
"Opera," p. 260) apparently in a figurative sense, but when dispensed by
a minister called a _priest_, such language became exceedingly liable to
misconception.

[645:3] In proof of this see Cyprian, Epist. lvi. p. 200, and lxiii.
p. 231. In the former place Cyprian says--"Mindful of the Eucharist,
the hand which has received _the Lord's body_ may embrace the _Lord
himself_."

[645:4] Heb. v. 4; Acts xx. 28, xxvi. 16.

[646:1] Cyprian, Epist. xlvi. p. 136.

[646:2] Epist. lxix. p. 262. See also Epist. lv. p. 177. "If any amount
of difference of opinion as to the truth or untruth of the teaching of a
geographical priesthood, will justify separation under another Christian
ministry, then it at once ceases to be true that there _can_ be but one
bishop, or one priest, over any given area in which such differences
exist; there then _may_ obviously be as many bishops, or as many
priests, as there may be different bodies of men differing from each
other's teaching in what they deem sufficiently essential points to
justify separation."--_Letter from the Duke of Argyll to the Bishop of
Oxford_, p. 8.

[647:1] Epist. lxix. p. 264.

[647:2] Acts x. 48.

[648:1] Jerome, "Catalogue of Ecclesiastical Writers."

[648:2] Some of those called heretics had many martyrs. Euseb. v. 16.

[648:3] "De Unit. Ecc." Opera, p. 399.

[648:4] "De Unit. Ecc." p. 401.

[648:5] "De Unit. Ecc." p. 401.

[649:1] Jeremiah xxiii. 21, 22.

[649:2] Phil. i. 15, 18. See also Mark ix. 38, 39.

[649:3] Cyprian himself makes this admission. Epist. lxxvi. p. 319.

[649:4] Epist. lii. p. 156.

[649:5] Epist. lxxvi. p. 319.

[650:1] Rom. x. 13,17.

[650:2] Tertullian did not hold the doctrine of her perpetual virginity.
See "De Monog." c. 8, and "De Carne Christi," c. 23. Neither did he
believe in her immaculate conception. See Kaye's "Tertullian," p. 338.

[652:1] One of the most distinguished and sagacious of modern
missionaries has called attention to this fact. See Livingstone's
"Missionary Travels in South Africa," p. 107.

[654:1] Maximian, in his famous edict of toleration, lays great stress
on this circumstance. "De Mortibus Persecutorum," c. 34.

[654:2] Cornelius to Cyprian, Epist. xlvi. p. 136.

[654:3] "De Unit. Eccles." p. 397.

[654:4] Epist. lii. p. 156.

[654:5] Matt. xvi. 18.

[654:6] Cyprian, Epist. xl. pp. 120, 121.

[656:1] 2 Cor. iii. 17.

[656:2] Isa. xl. 4, 5.

[656:3] Isa. lii. 8.

[656:4] Zech. xiv. 9.






End of Project Gutenberg's The Ancient Church, by W.D. [William Dool] Killen

