the foundation underlying all fairy mythologies. We need only refer to
the following phenomena observed among Celtic and other peoples, and
attributed by them to 'fairy' or 'spirit' agency: (1) music which
competent percipients believe to be of non-human origin, and hence by
the Celts called 'fairy' music, whether this be vocal or instrumental in
sound; (2) the movement of objects without known cause; (3) rappings and
other noises called 'supernatural' (cf. pp. 81 n., 481-4, 488; also pp.
47, 57, 61, 67, 71, 72, 74, 88, 94, 98, 101, 120, 124, 125, 131, 132,
134, 139, 148, 156, 172, 181, 187, 213, 218, 220, &c.).

[592] It is our hope that this book will help to lessen the marked
deficiency of recorded testimony concerning 'fairy' beings and 'fairy'
phenomena observed by reliable percipients. We have endeavoured to
demonstrate that genuine 'fairy' phenomena and genuine 'spirit'
phenomena are in most cases identical. Hence we believe that if 'spirit'
phenomena are worthy of the attention of science, equally so are 'fairy'
phenomena. The fairy-belief _in its typical_ or _conventional aspects_
(apart from the animism which we discovered at the base of the belief)
is, as was pointed out in our anthropological examination of the
evidence (pp. 281-2), due to a very complex social psychology. In this
chapter we have eliminated all social psychology, as not being the
essential factor in the Fairy-Faith. Therefore, from our point of view,
Mr. Lang's implied explanation of the typical fairy-visions, that they
are due to 'suggestion acting on the subconscious self', does not apply
to the rarer kind of fairy visions which form part of our x-quantity
(see pp. 60-6, 83-4, &c.). If it does, then it also applies to all
non-Celtic visions of spirits, in ancient and in modern times; and the
animistic hypothesis now accepted by most psychical researchers, namely,
that discarnate intelligences exist independent of the percipient, must
be set aside in favour of the non-animistic hypothesis. If, on the other
hand, it be admitted that 'fairy' phenomena are, as we maintain,
essentially the same as 'spirit' phenomena, then the belief in fairies
ceases to be purely mythical, and 'fairy' visions by a Celtic seer who
is physically and psychically sound do not seem to arise from that
seer's suggestion acting on his own subconsciousness; but certain types
of 'fairy' visions undoubtedly do arise from suggestion, _coming from a
'fairy' or other intelligence_, acting on the conscious or subconscious
content of the percipient's mind (cf. pp. 484-7).

[593] Lang, _Cock Lane and Common Sense_, pp. 208, 35.

[594] Sir Oliver Lodge, _Psychical Research_, in _Harper's Mag._, August
1908 (New York and London).

[595] Sir Oliver Lodge, _The Survival of Man_ (London, 1909), p. 339.

[596] James, op. cit., pp. 587-9.

[597] Readers are referred to such authoritative works as the _Phantasms
of the Living_ (London, 1886), by Gurney, Myers, and Podmore; to the
_Report on the Census of Hallucinations of Modern Spiritualism_, by
Professor Sidgwick's Committee; to the _Naturalisation of the
Supernatural_ (New York and London, 1908), by F. Podmore; to the
_Survival of the Human Personality_, by F. W. H. Myers; and other like
works, all of which originate from the _Proceedings of the Society for
Psychical Research_ (London).

[598] C. Flammarion, _Mysterious Psychic Forces_, pp. 441, 431.

[599] Sir Wm. Crookes, _Notes of an Enquiry into Phenomena called
Spiritual, during the years 1870-73_ (London), Part III, p. 87.

[600] See _Quart. Journ. Science_ (July 1871).

[601] Cf. Lang, _Cock Lane and Common Sense_, p. 281; and for other
cases of objects moved without contact see ib., pp. 50, 52, 53, 58, 122
ff. See also F. Podmore's article on _Poltergeists_, in _Proceedings S.
P. R._, xii. 45-115; and his _Naturalisation of the Supernatural_,
chapter vii.

[602] Sir Wm. Crookes, op. cit., Part III, p. 100.

[603] Ib., p. 94.

[604] Lang, _Cock Lane and Common Sense_, pp. 60, 81, 139, &c.

[605] Using as a basis the data of Professor Sidgwick's Committee and
the results earlier obtained by Gurney, Myers, and Podmore (see
_Phantasms of the Living_), Mr. William McDougall shows concisely the
probability of an apparition appearing within twelve hours of the death
of the individual whom it represents. He says:--'... of all recognized
apparitions of living persons, only one in 19,000 may be expected to be
a death-coincidence of this sort. But the census shows that of 1,300
recognized apparitions of living persons 30 are death-coincidences, and
that is equivalent to 440 in 19,000. Hence, of recognized
hallucinations, those coincident with death are 440 times more numerous
than we should expect, if no causal relation obtained.' And Mr.
McDougall concludes: '... since good evidence of telepathic
communication has been experimentally obtained, the least improbable
explanation of these death-apparitions is that the dying person exerts
upon his distant friend some telepathic influence which generates an
hallucinatory perception of himself' (_Hallucinations_, in _Ency.
Brit._, 11th ed., xii. 863).

[606] Myers, op. cit., ii. 65, 45 ff., 49 ff., &c.

[607] Nevius, _Demon Possession_, Introduction, pp. iv, vii; pp. 240-2,
144-5. In accordance with all such phenomena, psychical researchers have
logically called spirits manifesting themselves through the body of a
living person possessing spirits. And as in the case of Chinese
demon-possession, the phenomena of mediumship often result in the moral
derangement, insanity, or even suicide on the part of 'mediums' who so
unwisely exhibit it without special preparation or no preparation at
all, and too often in complete ignorance of a possible gradual
undermining of their psychic life, will-power, and even physical health.
All of this seems to offer direct and certain evidence to sustain
Christians and non-Christians in their condemnation of all forms of
necromancy or calling up of spirits. The following statement will make
our position towards mediumship of the most common kind clear:

In Druidism, for one example, disciples for training in magical sciences
are said to have spent twenty years in severe study and special
psychical training before deemed fit to be called Druids and thus to
control daemons, ghosts, or all invisible entities capable of possessing
living men and women. And even now in India and elsewhere there is
reported to be still the same ancient course of severe disciplinary
training for candidates seeking magical powers. But in modern
Spiritualism conditions are altogether different in most cases, and
'mediums' instead of controlling with an iron will, as a magician does,
spirits which become manifest in _seances_, surrender entirely their
will-power and whole personality to them.

[608] Cf. Sigmund Freud, _The Origin and Development of Psychoanalysis_,
in _Amer. Journ. Psych._, xxi, No. 2 (April 1910).

[609] The fact that all matter is capable of assuming a gaseous or
invisible state furnishes good scientific reasons for postulating the
actual existence of intelligent beings possessed of an invisible yet
physical body. There may well be on and about our planet many distinct
invisible organic life-forms undiscovered by zoologists. To deny such a
possibility would be unscientific.

[610] Cf. _Communication adressee au D{r} J. Dupre_, p. 382 of an essay
on _La Metempsycose basee sur les Principes de la Biologie et du
Magnetisme physiologique_, in _Le Hasard_ (Paris, 1909), by P. C. Revel.
Cases of regeneration among the aged are known, and these show how the
subliminal life-forces try to renew the physical body when it is worn
out (cf. Revel, ib., p. 372).

[611] Cf. Revel, op. cit., p. 295 ff.

[612] If scientists discover, as they probably will in time, what they
call the secret of life, they will not have discovered the secret of
life at all. What they will have discovered will be the physical
conditions under which life manifests itself. In other words, science
will most likely soon be able to set up artificially in a laboratory
such physical conditions as exist in nature naturally, and by means of
which life is able to manifest itself through matter. Life will still be
as great a mystery as it is to-day; though short-sighted materialists
are certain to announce to an eager world that the final problem of the
universe has been solved and that life is merely the resultant of a
subtle chemical compound.

[613] Professor Freud, after long and careful study, arrived at the
following conclusion:--'The child has his sexual impulse and activities
from the beginning, he brings them with him into the world, and from
these the so-called normal sexuality of adults emerges by a significant
development through manifold stages.' And Dr. Sanford Bell, in an
earlier writing entitled _A Preliminary Study of the Emotions of Love
between the Sexes_ (see _Amer. Journ. Psych._, 1902), came to a similar
conclusion (cf. Freud, op. cit., pp. 207-8).

[614] Cf. Hans Driesch, _The Science and Philosophy of the Organism_
(London, 1908); and Henri Bergson, _L'Evolution creatrice_ (Paris,
1908).

[615] This Celtic view of non-personal immortality completely fits in
with all the voluminous data of psychical research: after forty years of
scientific research into psychics there are no proofs yet adduced that
the human personality as a self-sufficient unit of consciousness
survives indefinitely the death of its body. Granted that it does
survive as a ghost for an undetermined period, generally to be counted
in years, during which time it seems to be gradually fading out or
disintegrating, there is no reliable evidence anywhere to show that a
personality _as such_ has manifested through a 'medium' or otherwise
after an interval of one thousand years, or even of five hundred years.
We have, in fact, no knowledge of the survival of a human personality
one hundred years after, and probably there are no good examples of such
a survival twenty-five years after the death of the body. Such an
eminent psychical researcher as William James recognized this drift of
the data of psychics, and when he died he held the conviction that there
is no personal immortality (see p. 505 n. following).

[616] Though not inclined toward the vitalistic view of human evolution,
M. Th. Ribot very closely approaches the Celtic view of the Ego (or
individuality) as being the principle which gives unity to different
personalities, but he does not have in mind personalities in the sense
implied by the Celtic Esoteric Doctrine of Re-birth:--'The Ego
subjectively considered consists of a sum of conscious states'
(comparable to personalities).... 'In brief, the Ego may be considered
in two ways: either in its actual form, and then it is the sum of
existing conscious states; or, in its continuity with the past, and then
it is formed by the memory according to the process outlined above. It
would seem, according to this view, that the identity of the Ego
depended entirely upon the memory. But such a conception is only
partial. Beneath the unstable compound phenomenon in all its protean
phases of growth, degeneration, and reproduction, there is a something
that remains: and this something is the undefined consciousness, the
product of all the vital processes, constituting bodily perception and
what is expressed in one word--the _coenaesthesis_.' (_The Diseases of
Memory_, pp. 107-8).

William James, the greatest psychologist of our epoch, after a long and
faithful life consecrated to the search after a true understanding of
human consciousness, finally arrived at substantially the same
conviction as Fechner did, that there is no personal immortality, but
that the personality 'is but a temporary and partial separation and
circumscription of a part of a larger whole, into which it is reabsorbed
at death' (W. McDougall, _In Memory of William James_, in _Proc. S. P.
R._, Part LXII, vol. xxv, p. 28). He thus virtually accepted the
mystic's view that the personality after the death of the body is
absorbed into a higher power, which, to our mind, is comparable with the
Ego conceived as the unifying principle behind personalities. In one of
his last writings, James explained his belief in such a manner as to
make it coincide at certain points with the view held by modern Celtic
mystics which has been presented above; the difference being that,
unlike these mystics, James was not prepared to say (though he raised
the question) whether or not behind the 'mother-sea' of consciousness
there is, as Fechner believed, a hierarchy of consciousnesses
(themselves subordinate to still higher consciousnesses, and comparable
with so many Egos or Individualities) which send out emanations as
temporary human personalities. The organic psychical forms (if we may
use such an expression) of such temporary human personalities would have
to be regarded from James's point of view as being built up out of the
psychical elements constituting the 'mother-sea' of consciousness, just
as the human body is built up out of the physical elements in the realm
of matter:--'Out of my experience, such as it is (and it is limited
enough) one fixed conclusion dogmatically emerges, and that is this,
that we with our lives are like islands in the sea, or like trees in the
forest. The maple and the pine may whisper to each other with their
leaves, and Conanicut and Newport hear each other's foghorns. But the
trees also commingle their roots in the darkness underground, and the
islands also hang together through the ocean's bottom. Just so there is
a continuum of cosmic consciousness, against which our individuality'
(used as synonymous with personality and not in our distinct sense)
'builds but accidental fences, and into which our several minds plunge
as into a mother-sea or reservoir. Our "normal" consciousness' (the
personality as we distinguish it from the Ego or individuality) 'is
circumscribed for adaptation to our external earthly environment, but
the fence is weak in spots, and fitful influences from beyond break in,
showing the otherwise unverifiable common connexion. Not only psychic
research, but metaphysical philosophy and speculative biology are led in
their own ways to look with favour on some such "pan-psychic" view of
the universe as this.' (W. James, _The Confidences of a Psychical
Researcher_, in _The American Magazine_, October 1909). Again, James
wrote:--'The drift of all the evidence we have seems to me to sweep us
very strongly towards the belief in some form of superhuman life with
which we may, unknown to ourselves, be co-conscious.' (_A Pluralistic
Universe_, New York, 1909, p. 309.)

[617] W. James, _Varieties of Religious Experience_ (London, 1902), pp.
511, 236 n.

[618] M. Th. Ribot, in _Diseases of Memory_ (London, 1882), pp. 82-98
ff., gives numerous examples of such loss and recovery of memory.

[619] Cf. Freud, op. cit., pp. 192, 204-5, &c.

[620] Cf. A. Moll, _Hypnotism_ (London, 1890), pp. 141 ff., 126.

[621] Cf. A. Moll, _Hypnotism_ (London, 1890), pp. 141 ff., 126.

[622] Cf. Freud, op. cit., p. 192.

[623] Freud, _Die Traumdeutung_, 2nd ed. (Vienna, 1906); cf. S.
Ferenczi, _The Psychological Analysis of Dreams_, in _Amer. Journ.
Psych._ (April 1910), xxi, No. 2, p. 326.

[624] A similar state of high development is to be assumed for a great
Celtic hero like Arthur, who were he to be re-born would (as is said to
have been the case with King Mongan, the reincarnation of Finn) bring
with him memory of his past: unlike the consciousness of the normal man,
the consciousness of one of the Divine Ones is normally the
subconsciousness, the consciousness of the individuality; and not the
personal consciousness, which, like the personality, is non-permanent
_in itself_. This further illustrates the Celtic theory of non-personal
immortality.

[625] Ribot, op. cit., p. 100 ff.

[626] Cf. Lang, _Cock Lane and Common Sense_, pp. 217 ff. _Blackwood's
Magazine_, cxxix (January 1881), contains a remarkable account of a
child who remembered previous lives. Lord Lindsay, in his _Letters_ (ed.
of 1847, p. 351), refers to a feeling when he beheld the river Kadisha
descending from Lebanon, of having in a previous life seen the same
scene. Dickens in his _Pictures from Italy_ testifies to a parallel
experience. E. D. Walker, in his interesting work on _Reincarnation_
(pp. 42-5) has brought together many other well-attested cases of people
who likewise have thought they could remember fragments of a former
state of conscious existence. In his diary, under date of February 17,
1828, Sir Walter Scott wrote as follows:--'I cannot, I am sure, tell if
it is worth marking down, that yesterday, at dinner-time, I was
strangely haunted by what I would call the sense of pre-existence, viz.
a confused idea that nothing that passed was said for the first time.'
Lockhart, _Life of Scott_ (first ed.), vii. 114. Bulwer Lytton in
_Godolphin_ (chapter xv), and Edgar Allen Poe in _Eureka_, record
similar experiences. Mr. H. Fielding Hall, in _The Soul of a People_{4}
(London, 1902), pp. 290-308, reports several very remarkable cases of
responsible natives of Burma who stated that they could recall former
lives passed by them as men and women. Mr. Hall has carefully
investigated these cases, and gives us the impression that they are
worthy of scientific consideration.

[627] Cf. Ferenczi, op. cit., p. 316, &c. Professor Freud's theory of
dreams supports entirely, but does not imply our hypothesis that some
(and probably many) abnormal dreams of a rare kind, whether good or bad
in tendency, may be due to the latent content of subconsciousness, out
of which they undoubtedly arise, having been collected and carried over
from a previous state of consciousness parallel to our present one. In
respect to our present life Professor Freud holds, as a result of
psycho-analysis of thousands of dream subjects, that the latent content
of every dream in the adult is directly dependent upon mental processes
which frequently reach back to the earliest childhood; and he gives
detailed cases in illustration. In other words, there is always a latent
dream-material behind the conscious dream-content, and probably a part
of it was innate in the child at birth, and hence, according to our
view, was pre-existent. (Cf. Ernest Jones, _Freud's Theory of Dreams_,
in _Amer. Journ. Psych._, April 1910, xxi, No. 2, pp. 301 ff.)

[628] Cf. Du Prel, _Philosophy of Mysticism_, ii. 25 ff., 34 ff.

[629] _The Dream of Ravan_, in _Dublin Univ. Mag._, xliii. 468.

[630] Myers, in _Proc. S. P. R._, vii. 305.

[631] James, _Varieties of Religious Experience_, p. 483.

[632] The esoteric teaching in many of the mystic schools of antiquity
was that the atoms of each human body transmigrate through all lower
forms of life during the long period supposed to intervene between death
and re-birth of the individuality. This doctrine seems to be one of the
main sources of the corruption which crept into the ancient re-birth
doctrines and transformed many of them into doctrines of transmigration
of the human soul into animal and plant bodies; and some unscrupulous
priesthoods openly taught such corrupted doctrines as a means of making
the ignorant populace submissive to ecclesiastical rule, the theological
theory expounded by such priesthoods being that the evil-doer, but not
the keeper of the letter of the canonical law, is condemned to expiate
his sins through birth in brute bodies. The pure form of the mystic
doctrine was that after the lapse of the long period of disembodiment
the individuality reconstructs its human body anew by drawing to itself
the identical atoms which constituted its previous human body--these
atoms, and not the individuality, having transmigrated through all the
lower kingdoms. Such an esoteric doctrine probably lies behind the
exoteric Egyptian teaching that the human soul after the death of its
body passes through all plant and animal bodies during a period of three
thousand years, after which it returns to human embodiment. Some
scholars have held that the exoteric interpretation of this theory and
its consequent literal interpretation as a transmigration doctrine led
the Egyptians to mummify the bodies of their dead. Cf. Lucretius, _De
Rerum Natura_, Book III, ll. 843-61; and Herodotus, Book II, on Egypt.

[633] Cf. Dr. L. S. Fugairon's _La Survivance de l'ame, ou la Mort et la
Renaissance chez les etres vivants; etudes de physiologie et
d'embryologie philosophiques_ (Paris, 1907); cf. Revel, _Le Hasard_, p.
457.

[634] Darwin never considered or attempted to suggest what it is that of
itself really evolves, for it cannot be the physical body which only
_grows_ from immaturity to maturity and then dissolves. Darwin thus
overlooked the essential factor in his whole doctrine; while the Druids
and other ancients, wiser than we have been willing to admit, seem not
only to have anticipated Darwin by thousands of years, but also to have
quite surpassed him in setting up their doctrine of re-birth, which
explains both the physical and psychical evolution of man.




Transcriber's Notes:

Passages in italics are indicated by _italics_.

Superscripted letters are indicated by {superscript}.

The original text includes Greek characters. For this text version these
letters have been replaced with transliterations.

Some quotes are opened with marks but are not closed. Obvious errors
have been silently closed while those requiring interpretation have
been left open.

Other punctuation has been corrected without note.

The following misprints have been corrected:
  "Fortelling" standardized to "foretelling" (page 213)
  "fom" corrected to "from" (footnote 342)
  "Name" corrected to "Names" (Index)

Other than the corrections listed above, inconsistencies in spelling and
hyphenation have been retained from the original.

The following symbols were substituted for images on pages 272 and 273:
  Maltese cross = [C]
  Triangle = [T]
  Jupiter = [J]
  Mercury = [M]
  Venus = [V]
  Saturn = [S]
  Moon = [Mo]
  Sun = [O]
  Large Asterisk [*]






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Fairy-Faith in Celtic Countries, by
W. Y. Evans Wentz

