too, so also is _Enthusiasm._ And I have sometimes wonder'd, when I have
read the Whimsies and Conceits of the _Arab_ Enthusiasts (whose numerous
Sects equal those Heresies mention'd by _Epiphanius_, or even that
plentiful Crop which the Devil has sow'd of them in our times) to find
such a Harmony between them and ours at present. Such a perfect
Agreement in their wild Notions, and these express'd in the very
self-same Cant, may easily convince any one, that the Instruments of
both were strung and tun'd by the same Hand. Another thing observable is
this; Let the _Enthusiast_ have never such great Abilities, there is
always something or other which proves his Pretensions to Revelation to
be false; and as they tell us, that, let the Devil change himself into
what Shape he will he can never conceal his Cloven Foot; so neither can
the _Enthusiast_ make himself pass for Inspired, with any Person of
tolerable discerning; but there will appear some very considerable Flaw,
which shall manifestly prove him a Deceiver, or at least a Person
deceiv'd. This is the Fate of them, and our Author could not avoid it.
He has indeed carried his Philosopher beyond the Orb of _Saturn_[46],
but he might as well have sav'd him that Trouble; for he brought nothing
down with him, but what he himself was able to furnish him withal before
he went; _viz. Mahometan Divinity_, and _Aristotelian Philosophy_. As to
the former of these I shall not need to say any thing; but I am well
assur'd, that when he talk'd of those Discoveries in the latter, made by
him when in that glorious State, he never dream'd in the least of those
more certain Discoveries which should be made afterwards, by the
Sagacity of our Astronomers and Philosophers; and that the contrary of
what he believ'd; as to those things, should be prov'd by undeniable
Demonstration.

Sec. 21. Nor does it succeed better with such Pretenders in our Age; who,
taught by woful Experience, have of late grown more wary, and rarely
pretended to Inspirations, except in such Matters as they might be well
assur'd of by other means. The safest way for them,I confess, tho' at
the same time extreamly absurd and ridiculous. For if a Man pretends to
know a thing by Divine Inspiration, when there are other Means of
attaining it: I have much more reason to think, either that he is an
Impostor and Deceiver,or else, that through warmth of Conceit, or the
Delusion of the Devil, he imagines himself to be divinely inspired when
he is not; rather than to believe that God, who does nothing but for
most wise and excellent Ends and Purposes, should reveal a thing to any
Person _immediately_, when he had before afforded him sufficient Means
of knowing it otherwise.

Sec. 22. It remains that we beg of God to give us his Grace, and the
Assistance of his Holy Spirit, that we may sincerely and heartily apply
our selves to the diligent Use of those Means which he has appointed for
our Instruction, in his Church. That we seek for the Knowledge of him in
his holy Word, and _approach_ to him in his Ordinances, and by a holy
pious Conversation. These are the Ways which he has chalk'd out for us;
and if any Persons will not be content with these Means, but will walk
in By-Paths, and follow every _Ignis fatuus_ that presents it self; if
they be are the last convinc'd of their fatal Mistake when it is too
late, they must blame themselves. God of his infinite Mercy lead them
out of their Errors, and guide both them and us through this imperfect
State, till at last we attain to the perfect Vision, and full Enjoyment
of himself; through _Jesus Christ_ our Lord. _Amen_.


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 33: _See_ Sect. 84, 85, &c.]

[Footnote 34: 2 _Pet_. 1. 21.]

[Footnote 35: _Dan_. x. 12.]

[Footnote 36: _Amos_ vii. 14.]

[Footnote 37: _By_ seeing all things in God, _I have no regard to Mr_.
Malebranch_'s Notion, but only to that of our Author._ See Sect. 90,
_&c_.]

[Footnote 38: _Maimonides in Pocockii Porta Mosis_, p. 171.]

[Footnote 39: _See the letter concerning, the Quietists, printed with
the B. of_ Sarum_'s Letters_.]

[Footnote 40: _John_ Chap. xiv, xv, xvi, xvii.]

[Footnote 41: _John_ xiii, 36. xiv, 2.]

[Footnote 42: _John_ xiv, 7. _Rom._ x, 17, 18.]

[Footnote 43: _Cor._ xiii, 12, 9.]

[Footnote 44: _Heb_. i, 1.]

[Footnote 45: _See_ Sect. 109.]

[Footnote 46: _See_ Sect. 90.]


       *       *       *       *       *


_FINIS_.







End of Project Gutenberg's The Improvement of Human Reason, by Ibn Tufail

